11447291	A mutant cholera toxin B subunit that binds GM1- ganglioside but lacks immunomodulatory or toxic activity.GM1-ganglioside receptor binding by the B subunit of cholera toxin (CtxB) is widely accepted to initiate toxin action by triggering uptake and delivery of the toxin A subunit into cells. More recently, GM1 binding by isolated CtxB, or the related B subunit of Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin (EtxB), has been found to modulate leukocyte function, resulting in the down-regulation of proinflammatory immune responses that cause autoimmune disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis and diabetes. Here, we demonstrate that GM1 binding, contrary to expectation, is not sufficient to initiate toxin action. We report the engineering and crystallographic structure of a mutant cholera toxin, with a His to Ala substitution in the B subunit at position 57. Whereas the mutant retained pentameric stability and high affinity binding to GM1-ganglioside, it had lost its immunomodulatory activity and, when part of the holotoxin complex, exhibited ablated toxicity. The implications of these findings on the mode of action of cholera toxin are discussed.

16403639	Mechanism of the Class I KDPG aldolase.In vivo, 2-keto-3-deoxy-6-phosphogluconate (KDPG) aldolase catalyzes the reversible, stereospecific retro-aldol cleavage of KDPG to pyruvate and d-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. The enzyme is a lysine-dependent (Class I) aldolase that functions through the intermediacy of a Schiff base. Here, we propose a mechanism for this enzyme based on crystallographic studies of wild-type and mutant aldolases. The three dimensional structure of KDPG aldolase from the thermophile Thermotoga maritima was determined to 1.9A. The structure is the standard alpha/beta barrel observed for all Class I aldolases. At the active site Lys we observe clear density for a pyruvate Schiff base. Density for a sulfate ion bound in a conserved cluster of residues close to the Schiff base is also observed. We have also determined the structure of a mutant of Escherichia coli KDPG aldolase in which the proposed general acid/base catalyst has been removed (E45N). One subunit of the trimer contains density suggesting a trapped pyruvate carbinolamine intermediate. All three subunits contain a phosphate ion bound in a location effectively identical to that of the sulfate ion bound in the T. maritima enzyme. The sulfate and phosphate ions experimentally locate the putative phosphate binding site of the aldolase and, together with the position of the bound pyruvate, facilitate construction of a model for the full-length KDPG substrate complex. The model requires only minimal positional adjustments of the experimentally determined covalent intermediate and bound anion to accommodate full-length substrate. The model identifies the key catalytic residues of the protein and suggests important roles for two observable water molecules. The first water molecule remains bound to the enzyme during the entire catalytic cycle, shuttling protons between the catalytic glutamate and the substrate. The second water molecule arises from dehydration of the carbinolamine and serves as the nucleophilic water during hydrolysis of the enzyme-product Schiff base. The second water molecule may also mediate the base-catalyzed enolization required to form the carbon nucleophile, again bridging to the catalytic glutamate. Many aspects of this mechanism are observed in other Class I aldolases and suggest a mechanistically and, perhaps, evolutionarily related family of aldolases distinct from the N-acetylneuraminate lyase (NAL) family.

12414796	Contribution of glycine 146 to a conserved folding module affecting stability and refolding of human glutathione transferase p1-1.In human glutathione transferase P1-1 (hGSTP1-1) position 146 is occupied by a glycine residue, which is located in a bend of a long loop that together with the alpha6-helix forms a substructure (GST motif II) maintained in all soluble GSTs. In the present study G146A and G146V mutants were generated by site-directed mutagenesis in order to investigate the function played by this conserved residue in folding and stability of hGSTP1-1. Crystallographic analysis of the G146V variant, expressed at the permissive temperature of 25 degrees C, indicates that the mutation causes a substantial change of the backbone conformation because of steric hindrance. Stability measurements indicate that this mutant is inactivated at a temperature as low as 32 degrees C. The structure of the G146A mutant is identical to that of the wild type with the mutated residue having main-chain bond angles in a high energy region of the Ramachandran plot. However even this Gly --> Ala substitution inactivates the enzyme at 37 degrees C. Thermodynamic analysis of all variants confirms, together with previous findings, the critical role played by GST motif II for overall protein stability. Analysis of reactivation in vitro indicates that any mutation of Gly-146 alters the folding pathway by favoring aggregation at 37 degrees C. It is hypothesized that the GST motif II is involved in the nucleation mechanism of the protein and that the substitution of Gly-146 alters this transient substructure. Gly-146 is part of the buried local sequence GXXh(T/S)XXDh (X is any residue and h is a hydrophobic residue), conserved in all GSTs and related proteins that seems to behave as a characteristic structural module important for protein folding and stability.

11148029	Strain is more important than electrostatic interaction in controlling the pKa of the catalytic group in aspartate aminotransferase.Systematic single and multiple replacement studies have been applied to Escherichia coli aspartate aminotransferase to probe the electrostatic effect of the two substrate-binding arginine residues, Arg292 and Arg386, and the structural effect of the pyridoxal 5'-phosphate-Asn194-Arg386 hydrogen-bond linkage system (PLP-N-R) on the pK(a) value of the Schiff base formed between pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP) and Lys258. The electrostatic effects of the two arginine residues cannot be assessed by simple mutational studies of the residues. PLP-N-R lowers the pK(a) value of the PLP-Lys258 Schiff base by keeping it in the distorted conformation, which is unfavorable for protonation. Mutation of Arg386 eliminates its hydrogen bond with Asn194 and partially disrupts PLP-N-R, thereby relaxing the strain of the Schiff base. On the other hand, mutation of Arg292, the large domain residue that interacts with the small domain residue Asp15, makes the domain opening easier. Because PLP-N-R lies between the two domains, the domain opening increases the strain of the Schiff base. Therefore, the true electrostatic effects of Arg292 and Arg386 could be derived from mutational analysis of the enzyme in which PLP-N-R had been completely disrupted by the Asn194Ala mutation. Through the analyses, we could dissect the electrostatic and structural effects of the arginine mutations on the Schiff base pK(a). The positive charges of the two arginine residues and the PLP-N-R-mediated strain of the Schiff base lower the Schiff base pK(a) by 0.7 and 1.7, respectively. Thus, the electrostatic effect of the arginine residues is not as strong as has historically been thought, and this finding substantiates our recent finding that the imine-pyridine torsion of the Schiff base is the primary determinant (2.8 unit decrease) of the extremely low pK(a) value of the Schiff base [Hayashi, H., Mizuguchi, H., and Kagamiyama, H. (1998) Biochemistry 37, 15076-15085].

16443929	Solution Structure of a Post-transition State Analog of the Phosphotransfer Reaction between the A and B Cytoplasmic Domains of the Mannitol Transporter IIMannitol of the Escherichia coli Phosphotransferase System.The solution structure of the post-transition state complex between the isolated cytoplasmic A (IIA(Mtl)) and phosphorylated B (phospho-IIB(Mtl)) domains of the mannitol transporter of the Escherichia coli phosphotransferase system has been solved by NMR. The active site His-554 of IIA(Mtl) was mutated to glutamine to block phosphoryl transfer activity, and the active site Cys-384 of IIB(Mtl) (residues of IIB(Mtl) are denoted in italic type) was substituted by serine to permit the formation of a stable phosphorylated form of IIB(Mtl). The two complementary interaction surfaces are predominantly hydrophobic, and two methionines on IIB(Mtl), Met-388 and Met-393, serve as anchors by interacting with two deep pockets on the surface of IIA(Mtl). With the exception of a salt bridge between the conserved Arg-538 of IIA(Mtl) and the phosphoryl group of phospho-IIB(Mtl), electrostatic interactions between the two proteins are limited to the outer edges of the interface, are few in number, and appear to be weak. This accounts for the low affinity of the complex (K(d) approximately 3.7 mm), which is optimally tuned to the intact biological system in which the A and B domains are expressed as a single polypeptide connected by a flexible 21-residue linker. The phosphoryl transition state can readily be modeled with no change in protein-protein orientation and minimal perturbations in both the backbone immediately adjacent to His-554 and Cys-384 and the side chains in close proximity to the phosphoryl group. Comparison with the previously solved structure of the IIA(Mtl)-HPr complex reveals how IIA(Mtl) uses the same interaction surface to recognize two structurally unrelated proteins and explains the much higher affinity of IIA(Mtl) for HPr than IIB(Mtl).

8384877	The Asp-His-Fe triad of cytochrome c peroxidase controls the reduction potential, electronic structure, and coupling of the tryptophan free radical to the heme.The buried charge of Asp-235 in cytochrome c peroxidase (CCP) forms an important hydrogen bond to the histidine ligand of the heme iron. The Asp-His-metal interaction, which is similar to the catalytic triad of serine proteases, is found at the active site of many metalloenzymes and is believed to modulate the character of histidine as a metal ligand. We have examined the influence of this interaction in CCP on the function, redox properties, and iron zero-field splitting in the native ferric state and its effect on the Trp-191 free radical site in the oxidized ES complex. Unlike D235A and D235N, the mutation D235E introduces very little perturbation in the X-ray crystal structure of the enzyme active site, with only minor changes in the geometry of the carboxylate-histidine interaction and no observable change at the Trp-191 free radical site. More significant effects are observed in the position of the helix containing residue Glu-235. However, the small change in hydrogen bond geometry is all that is necessary to (1) increase the reduction potential by 70 mV, (2) alter the anisotropy of the Trp-191 free radical EPR, (3) affect the activity and spin-state equilibrium, and (4) reduce the strength of the iron ligand field as measured by the zero-field splitting. The changes in the redox potential with substitution are correlated with the observed zero-field splitting, suggesting that redox control is exerted through the heme ligand by a combination of electrostatic and ligand field effects. The replacement of Asp-235 with Glu appears to result in a significantly weaker hydrogen bond in which the proton resides essentially with His-175. This hydrogen bond is nevertheless strong enough to prevent the reorientation of Trp-191 and the conversion to one of two low-spin states observed for D235A and D235N. The Asp-His-Fe interaction is therefore as important in defining the redox properties and imidazolate character of His-175 as has been proposed, yet its most important role in peroxidase function may be to correctly orient Trp-191 for efficient coupling of the free radical to the heme and to maintain a high-spin 5-coordinate heme center.

10913274	Role of amino acid residues at turns in the conformational stability and folding of human lysozyme.To clarify the role of amino acid residues at turns in the conformational stability and folding of a globular protein, six mutant human lysozymes deleted or substituted at turn structures were investigated by calorimetry, GuHCl denaturation experiments, and X-ray crystal analysis. The thermodynamic properties of the mutant and wild-type human lysozymes were compared and discussed on the basis of their three-dimensional structures. For the deletion mutants, Delta47-48 and Delta101, the deleted residues are in turns on the surface and are absent in human alpha-lactalbumin, which is homologous to human lysozyme in amino acid sequence and tertiary structure. The stability of both mutants would be expected to increase due to a decrease in conformational entropy in the denatured state; however, both proteins were destabilized. The destabilizations were mainly caused by the disappearance of intramolecular hydrogen bonds. Each part deleted was recovered by the turn region like the alpha-lactalbumin structure, but there were differences in the main-chain conformation of the turn between each deletion mutant and alpha-lactalbumin even if the loop length was the same. For the point mutants, R50G, Q58G, H78G, and G37Q, the main-chain conformations of these substitution residues located in turns adopt a left-handed helical region in the wild-type structure. It is thought that the left-handed non-Gly residue has unfavorable conformational energy compared to the left-handed Gly residue. Q58G was stabilized, but the others had little effect on the stability. The structural analysis revealed that the turns could rearrange the main-chain conformation to accommodate the left-handed non-Gly residues. The present results indicate that turn structures are able to change their main-chain conformations, depending upon the side-chain features of amino acid residues on the turns. Furthermore, stopped-flow GuHCl denaturation experiments on the six mutants were performed. The effects of mutations on unfolding-refolding kinetics were significantly different among the mutant proteins. The deletion/substitutions in turns located in the alpha-domain of human lysozyme affected the refolding rate, indicating the contribution of turn structures to the folding of a globular protein.

11371193	Role of charged residues at the OmpF porin channel constriction probed by mutagenesis and simulation.The channel constriction of OmpF porin, a pore protein in the bacterial outer membrane, is highly charged due to the presence of three arginines (R42, R82, and R132) and two acidic residues (D113 and E117). The influence of these charges on ion conductance, ion selectivity, and voltage gating has been studied with mutants D113N/E117Q, R42A/R82A/R132A/D113N/E117Q, and V18K/G131K, which were designed to remove or add protein charge at the channel constriction. The crystal structures revealed no or only local changes compared to wild-type OmpF, thus allowing a comparative study. The single-channel conductance of the isosteric D113N/E117Q variant was found to be 2-fold reduced, and that of the pentuple mutant was 70% of the wild-type value, despite a considerably larger pore cross section. Ion selectivity was drastically altered by the mutations with cation/anion permeability ratios ranging from 1 to 12. Ion flow through these and eight other mutants, which have been characterized previously, was simulated by Brownian dynamics based on the detailed crystal structures. The calculated ion selectivity and relative channel conductance values agree well with the experimental data. This demonstrates that ion translocation through porin is mainly governed by pore geometry and charge, the two factors that are properly represented in the simulations.

9655825	Drug design against a shifting target: a structural basis for resistance to inhibitors in a variant of influenza virus neuraminidase.BACKGROUND: Inhibitors of the influenza virus neuraminidase have been shown to be effective antiviral agents in humans. Several studies have reported the selection of novel influenza strains when the virus is cultured with neuraminidase inhibitors in vitro. These resistant viruses have mutations either in the neuraminidase or in the viral haemagglutinin. Inhibitors in which the glycerol sidechain at position 6 of 2-deoxy-2,3-dehydro-N-acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac2en) has been replaced by carboxamide-linked hydrophobic substituents have recently been reported and shown to select neuraminidase variants. This study seeks to clarify the structural and functional consequences of replacing the glycerol sidechain of the inhibitor with other chemical constituents. RESULTS: The neuraminidase variant Arg292-->Lys is modified in one of three arginine residues that encircle the carboxylate group of the substrate. The structure of this variant in complex with the carboxamide inhibitor used for its selection, and with other Neu5Ac2en analogues, is reported here at high resolution. The structural consequences of the mutation correlate with altered inhibitory activity of the compounds compared with wild-type neuraminidase. CONCLUSIONS: The Arg292-->Lys variant of influenza neuraminidase affects the binding of substrate by modification of the interaction with the substrate carboxylate. This may be one of the structural correlates of the reduced enzyme activity of the variant. Inhibitors that have replacements for the glycerol at position 6 are further affected in the Arg292-->Lys variant because of structural changes in the binding site that apparently raise the energy barrier for the conformational change in the enzyme required to accommodate such inhibitors. These results provide evidence that a general strategy for drug design when the target has a high mutation frequency is to design the inhibitor to be as closely related as possible to the natural ligands of the target.

8706698	A site-directed mutagenesis study of Saccharomyces cerevisiae pyrophosphatase. Functional conservation of the active site of soluble inorganic pyrophosphatases.We report the expression and initial characterization of 19 active-site variants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae inorganic pyrophosphatase (PPase), including measurements of thermostability, oligomeric structure and specific activity at pH 7.2. 13 of the 19 conservative substitutions resulted in at least a fivefold decrease in activity, indicating that these residues are important for yeast PPase catalysis. The E58D, D117E, D120E and D152E variants had no activity under the conditions tested, suggesting that Glu58, Asp117, Asp120 and Asp152 may have crucial roles in catalysis. The effects of the mutations on catalytic activity were very similar to those observed with the corresponding variants of Escherichia coli PPase, proving conclusively that the active site and mechanism of soluble PPases are conserved. The D71E variant was more thermostable and the K56R, R78K, D115E and K154R variants were more thermolabile than the wild-type enzyme, whereas subunit:subunit interactions were somewhat weakened by the K56R, R78K, Y89F and K154R substitutions. These results suggest that Lys56, Asp71, Arg78, Tyr89, Asp115 and Lys154 are structurally important for yeast PPase.

12228249	Substrate-dependent competency of the catalytic triad of prolyl oligopeptidase.Prolyl oligopeptidase, a serine peptidase unrelated to trypsin and subtilisin, is implicated in memory disorders and is an important target of drug design. The catalytic competence of the Asp(641) residue of the catalytic triad (Ser(554), Asp(641), His(680)) was studied using the D641N and D641A variants of the enzyme. Both variants displayed 3 orders of magnitude reduction in k(cat)/K(m) for benzyloxycarbonyl-Gly-Pro-2-naphthylamide. Using an octapeptide substrate, the decrease was 6 orders of magnitude, whereas with Z-Gly-Pro-4-nitrophenyl ester there was virtually no change in k(cat)/K(m). This indicates that the contribution of Asp(641) is very much dependent on the substrate-leaving group, which was not the case for the classic serine peptidase, trypsin. The rate constant for benzyloxycarbonyl-Gly-Pro-thiobenzylester conformed to this series as demonstrated by a method designed for monitoring the hydrolysis of thiolesters in the presence of thiol groups. Alkylation of His(680) with Z-Gly-Pro-CH(2)Cl was concluded with similar rate constants for wild-type and D641A variant. However, kinetic measurements with Z-Gly-Pro-OH, a product-like inhibitor, indicated that the His(680) is not accessible in the enzyme variants. Crystal structure determination of these mutants revealed subtle perturbations related to the catalytic activity. Many of these observations show differences in the catalysis between trypsin and prolyl oligopeptidase.

8805557	Crystal structures of reduced, oxidized, and mutated human thioredoxins: evidence for a regulatory homodimer.BACKGROUND: Human thioredoxin reduces the disulfide bonds of numerous proteins in vitro, and can activate transcription factors such as NFkB in vivo. Thioredoxin can also act as a growth factor, and is overexpressed and secreted in certain tumor cells. RESULTS: Crystal structures were determined for reduced and oxidized wild type human thioredoxin (at 1.7 and 2.1 A nominal resolution, respectively), and for reduced mutant proteins Cys73-->Ser and Cys32-->Ser/Cys35-->Ser (at 1.65 and 1.8 A, respectively). Surprisingly, thioredoxin is dimeric in all four structures; the dimer is linked through a disulfide bond between Cys73 of each monomer, except in Cys73-->Ser where a hydrogen bond occurs. The thioredoxin active site is blocked by dimer formation. Conformational changes in the active site and dimer interface accompany oxidation of the active-site cysteines, Cys32 and Cys35. CONCLUSIONS: It has been suggested that a reduced pKa in the first cysteine (Cys32 in human thioredoxin) of the active-site sequence is important for modulation of the redox potential in thioredoxin. A hydrogen bond between the sulfhydryls of Cys32 and Cys35 may reduce the pKa of Cys32 and this pKa depression probably results in increased nucleophilicity of the Cys32 thiolate group. This nucleophilicity, in tum, is thought to be necessary for the role of thioredoxin in disulfide-bond reduction. The physiological role, if any, of thioredoxin dimer formation remains unknown. It is possible that dimerization may provide a mechanism for regulation of the protein, or a means of sensing oxidative stress.

9694855	Interdomain binding of NADPH in p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase as suggested by kinetic, crystallographic and modeling studies of histidine 162 and arginine 269 variants.The conserved residues His-162 and Arg-269 of the flavoprotein p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase (EC 1.14.13.2) are located at the entrance of the interdomain cleft that leads toward the active site. To study their putative role in NADPH binding, His-162 and Arg-269 were selectively changed by site-specific mutagenesis. The catalytic properties of H162R, H162Y, and R269K were similar to the wild-type enzyme. However, less conservative His-162 and Arg-269 replacements strongly impaired NADPH binding without affecting the conformation of the flavin ring and the efficiency of substrate hydroxylation. The crystal structures of H162R and R269T in complex with 4-hydroxybenzoate were solved at 3.0 and 2.0 A resolution, respectively. Both structures are virtually indistinguishable from the wild-type enzyme-substrate complex except for the substituted side chains. In contrast to wild-type p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase, H162R is not inactivated by diethyl pyrocarbonate. NADPH protects wild-type p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from diethylpyrocarbonate inactivation, suggesting that His-162 is involved in NADPH binding. Based on these results and GRID calculations we propose that the side chains of His-162 and Arg-269 interact with the pyrophosphate moiety of NADPH. An interdomain binding mode for NADPH is proposed which takes a novel sequence motif (Eppink, M. H. M., Schreuder, H. A., and van Berkel, W. J. H. (1997) Protein Sci. 6, 2454-2458) into account.

15697221	Understanding GFP chromophore biosynthesis: controlling backbone cyclization and modifying post-translational chemistry.The Aequorea victoria green fluorescent protein (GFP) undergoes a remarkable post-translational modification to create a chromophore out of its component amino acids S65, Y66, and G67. Here, we describe mutational experiments in GFP designed to convert this chromophore into a 4-methylidene-imidazole-5-one (MIO) moiety similar to the post-translational active-site electrophile of histidine ammonia lyase (HAL). Crystallographic structures of GFP variant S65A Y66S (GFPhal) and of four additional related site-directed mutants reveal an aromatic MIO moiety and mechanistic details of GFP chromophore formation and MIO biosynthesis. Specifically, the GFP scaffold promotes backbone cyclization by (1) favoring nucleophilic attack by close proximity alignment of the G67 amide lone pair with the pi orbital of the residue 65 carbonyl and (2) removing enthalpic barriers by eliminating inhibitory main-chain hydrogen bonds in the precursor state. GFP R96 appears to induce structural rearrangements important in aligning the molecular orbitals for ring cyclization, favor G67 nitrogen deprotonation through electrostatic interactions with the Y66 carbonyl, and stabilize the reduced enolate intermediate. Our structures and analysis also highlight negative design features of the wild-type GFP architecture, which favor chromophore formation by destabilizing alternative conformations of the chromophore tripeptide. By providing a molecular basis for understanding and controlling the driving force and protein chemistry of chromophore creation, this research has implications for expansion of the genetic code through engineering of modified amino acids.

9108091	Unique features in the structure of the complex between HIV-1 reverse transcriptase and the bis(heteroaryl)piperazine (BHAP) U-90152 explain resistance mutations for this nonnucleoside inhibitor.The viral reverse transcriptase (RT) provides an attractive target in the search for anti-HIV therapies. The nonnucleoside inhibitors (NNIs) are a diverse set of compounds (usually HIV-1 specific) that function by distorting the polymerase active site upon binding in a nearby pocket. Despite being potent and of generally low toxicity, their clinical use has been limited by rapid selection for resistant viral populations. The 2.65-A resolution structure of the complex between HIV-1 RT and the bis(heteroaryl)piperazine (BHAP) NNI, 1-(5-methanesulfonamido-1H-indol-2-yl-carbonyl)-4- [3-(1-methyl-ethylamino) pyridinyl] piperazine (U-90152), reveals the inhibitor conformation and bound water molecules. The bulky U-90152 molecule occupies the same pocket as other NNIs, but the complex is stabilized quite differently, in particular by hydrogen bonding to the main chain of Lys-103 and extensive hydrophobic contacts with Pro-236. These interactions rationalize observed resistance mutations, notably Pro-236-Leu, which occurs characteristically for BHAPs. When bound, part of U-90152 protrudes into the solvent creating a channel between Pro-236 and the polypeptide segments 225-226 and 105-106, giving the first clear evidence of the entry mode for NNIs. The structure allows prediction of binding modes for related inhibitors [(altrylamino)piperidine-BHAPs] and suggests changes to U-90152, such as the addition of a 6 amino group to the pyridine ring, which may make binding more resilient to mutations in the RT. The observation of novel hydrogen bonding to the protein main chain may provide lessons for the improvement of quite different inhibitors.

12208978	Crystal structures of Zidovudine- or Lamivudine-resistant human immunodeficiency virus type 1 reverse transcriptases containing mutations at codons 41, 184, and 215.Six structures of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) reverse transcriptase (RT) containing combinations of resistance mutations for zidovudine (AZT) (M41L and T215Y) or lamivudine (M184V) have been determined as inhibitor complexes. Minimal conformational changes in the polymerase or nonnucleoside RT inhibitor sites compared to the mutant RTMC (D67N, K70R, T215F, and K219N) are observed, indicating that such changes may occur only with certain combinations of mutations. Model building M41L and T215Y into HIV-1 RT-DNA and docking in ATP that is utilized in the pyrophosphorolysis reaction for AZT resistance indicates that some conformational rearrangement appears necessary in RT for ATP to interact simultaneously with the M41L and T215Y mutations.

10970744	Crystal structures of mouse class II alcohol dehydrogenase reveal determinants of substrate specificity and catalytic efficiency.The structure of mouse class II alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH2) has been determined in a binary complex with the coenzyme NADH and in a ternary complex with both NADH and the inhibitor N-cyclohexylformamide to 2.2 A and 2.1 A resolution, respectively. The ADH2 dimer is asymmetric in the crystal with different orientations of the catalytic domains relative to the coenzyme-binding domains in the two subunits, resulting in a slightly different closure of the active-site cleft. Both conformations are about half way between the open apo structure and the closed holo structure of horse ADH1, thus resembling that of ADH3. The semi-open conformation and structural differences around the active-site cleft contribute to a substantially different substrate-binding pocket architecture as compared to other classes of alcohol dehydrogenase, and provide the structural basis for recognition and selectivity of alcohols and quinones. The active-site cleft is more voluminous than that of ADH1 but not as open and funnel-shaped as that of ADH3. The loop with residues 296-301 from the coenzyme-binding domain is short, thus opening up the pocket towards the coenzyme. On the opposite side, the loop with residues 114-121 stretches out over the inter-domain cleft. A cavity is formed below this loop and adds an appendix to the substrate-binding pocket. Asp301 is positioned at the entrance of the pocket and may control the binding of omega-hydroxy fatty acids, which act as inhibitors rather than substrates. Mouse ADH2 is known as an inefficient ADH with a slow hydrogen-transfer step. By replacing Pro47 with His, the alcohol dehydrogenase activity is restored. Here, the structure of this P47H mutant was determined in complex with NADH to 2.5 A resolution. His47 is suitably positioned to act as a catalytic base in the deprotonation of the substrate. Moreover, in the more closed subunit, the coenzyme is allowed a position closer to the catalytic zinc. This is consistent with hydrogen transfer from an alcoholate intermediate where the Pro/His replacement focuses on the function of the enzyme.

11867764	Conserved tryptophan in the core domain of transglutaminase is essential for catalytic activity.Transglutaminase 2 (TG2) is a distinctive member of the family of Ca2+-dependent enzymes recognized mostly by their abilities to catalyze the posttranslational crosslinking of proteins. TG2 uniquely binds and hydrolyzes GTP; binding GTP inhibits its crosslinking activity but allows it to function in signal transduction (hence the G(h) designation). The core domain of TG2 (residues 139-471, rat) comprises the papain-like catalytic triad and the GTP-binding domain (residues 159-173) and contains almost all of the conserved tryptophans of the protein. Examining point mutations at Trp positions 180, 241, 278, 332, and 337 showed that, upon binding 2'-(or 3')-O-(N-methylanthraniloyl)GTP (mantGTP), the Phe-332 mutant was the weakest (35% less than wild type) in resonance energy transfer from the protein (lambda(exc, max) = 290 nm) to the mant fluorophore (lambda(em) = 444 nm) and had a reduced affinity for mantGTP. Trp-332, situated near the catalytic center and the nucleotide-binding area of TG2, may be part of the allosteric relay machinery that transmits negative effector signals from nucleotide binding to the active center of TG2. A most important observation was that, whereas no enzyme activity could be detected when Trp-241 was replaced with Ala or Gln, partial preservation of catalytic activity was seen with substitutions by Tyr > Phe > His. The results indicate that Trp-241 is essential for catalysis, possibly by stabilizing the transition states by H-bonding, quadrupole-ion, or van der Waals interactions. This contrasts with the evolutionarily related papain family of cysteine proteases, which uses Gln-19 (papain) for stabilizing the transition state.

10877847	Chemically prepared hevein domains: effect of C-terminal truncation and the mutagenesis of aromatic residues on the affinity for chitin.Chemically prepared hevein domains (HDs), N-terminal domain of an antifungal protein from Nicotiana tabacum (CBP20-N) and an antimicrobial peptide from Amaranthus caudatus (Ac-AMP2), were examined for their affinity for chitin, a beta-1,4-linked polymer of N-acetylglucosamine. An intact binding domain, CBP20-N, showed a higher affinity than a C-terminal truncated domain, Ac-AMP2. The formation of a pyroglutamate residue from N-terminal Gln of CBP20-N increased the affinity. The single replacement of any aromatic residue of Ac-AMP2 with Ala resulted in a significant reduction in affinity, suggesting the importance of the complete set of three aromatic residues in the ligand binding site. The mutations of Phe18 of Ac-AMP2 to the residues with larger aromatic rings, i.e. Trp, beta-(1-naphthyl)alanine or beta-(2-naphthyl)alanine, enhanced the affinity, whereas the mutation of Tyr20 to Trp reduced the affinity. The affinity of an HD for chitin might be improved by adjusting the size and substituent group of stacking aromatic rings.

14661960	Thermodynamic cycle analysis and inhibitor design against beta-lactamase.Beta-lactamases are the most widespread resistance mechanism to beta-lactam antibiotics, such as the penicillins and cephalosporins. Transition-state analogues that bind to the enzymes with nanomolar affinities have been introduced in an effort to reverse the resistance conferred by these enzymes. To understand the origins of this affinity, and to guide design of future inhibitors, double-mutant thermodynamic cycle experiments were undertaken. An unexpected hydrogen bond between the nonconserved Asn289 and a key inhibitor carboxylate was observed in the X-ray crystal structure of a 1 nM inhibitor (compound 1) in complex with AmpC beta-lactamase. To investigate the energy of this hydrogen bond, the mutant enzyme N289A was made, as was an analogue of 1 that lacked the carboxylate (compound 2). The differential affinity of the four different protein and analogue complexes indicates that the carboxylate-amide hydrogen bond contributes 1.7 kcal/mol to overall binding affinity. Synthesis of an analogue of 1 where the carboxylate was replaced with an aldehyde led to an inhibitor that lost all this hydrogen bond energy, consistent with the importance of the ionic nature of this hydrogen bond. To investigate the structural bases of these energies, X-ray crystal structures of N289A/1 and N289A/2 were determined to 1.49 and 1.39 A, respectively. These structures suggest that no significant rearrangement occurs in the mutant versus the wild-type complexes with both compounds. The mutant enzymes L119A and L293A were made to investigate the interaction between a phenyl ring in 1 and these residues. Whereas deletion of the phenyl itself diminishes affinity by 5-fold, the double-mutant cycles suggest that this energy does not come through interaction with the leucines, despite the close contact in the structure. The energies of these interactions provide key information for the design of improved inhibitors against beta-lactamases. The high magnitude of the ion-dipole interaction between Asn289 and the carboxylate of 1 is consistent with the idea that ionic interactions can provide significant net affinity in inhibitor complexes.

12909636	An essential role for aspartate 264 in catalysis by tRNA-guanine transglycosylase from Escherichia coli.tRNA-guanine transglycosylase (TGT) catalyzes a post-transcriptional base-exchange reaction involved in the incorporation of the modified base queuine (Q) into the wobble position of certain tRNAs. Catalysis by TGT occurs through a double-displacement mechanism that involves the formation of a covalent enzyme-RNA intermediate (Kittendorf, J. D., Barcomb, L. M., Nonekowski, S. T., and Garcia, G. A. (2001) Biochemistry 40, 14123-14133). The TGT chemical mechanism requires the protonation of the displaced guanine and the deprotonation of the incoming heterocyclic base. Based on its position in the active site, it is likely that aspartate 264 is involved in these proton transfer events. To investigate this possibility, site-directed mutagenesis was employed to convert aspartate 264 to alanine, asparagine, glutamate, glutamine, lysine, and histidine. Biochemical characterization of these TGT mutants revealed that only the conservative glutamate mutant retained catalytic activity, with Km values for both tRNA and guanine 3-fold greater than those for wild-type, whereas the kcat was depressed by an order of magnitude. Furthermore, of these six TGT mutants, only the TGT(D264E) was capable of forming a TGT.RNA covalent intermediate; however, unlike wild-type TGT, only hydroxylamine is capable of cleaving the TGT(D264E).RNA covalent complex. In an effort to better understand the unique biochemical properties of the D264E TGT mutant, we solved the crystal structure of the Zymomonas mobilis TGT with the analogous mutation (D280E). The results of these studies support two roles for aspartate 264 in catalysis by TGT, protonation of the leaving guanine and deprotonation of the incoming preQ1.

9514636	Involvement of glutamic acid residue at position 7 in the formation of the intramolecular disulfide bond of Escherichia coli heat-stable enterotoxin Ip in vivo.Escherichia coli heat-stable enterotoxin Ip (STIp) is a small peptide toxin composed of 18 amino acid residues containing three intramolecular disulfide bonds. We found previously that the bonds are formed by the catalysis of DsbA (a oxidoreductase) in periplasm [1]. To interact with DsbA, the STIp in periplasm must have a structure suitable as substrate. However, the amino acid residues contributing to the construction of this structure have not been elucidated. We mutated the codon for the glutamic acid at position 7 of STIp by oligonucleotide site-specific mutagenesis in vivo and analysed the STIp produced from the mutant gene. The intramolecular disulfide bonds were not formed in mutant STIp (Glu-7-->Ala), but were formed in mutant STIp (Glu-7-->Asp). Furthermore, we found that replacing the asparagine residue at position 11 and the proline residue at position 12 did not affect the disulfide bond formation of STIp. The results indicate that a negative charge at position 7 in the sequence of STIp is necessary for STIp to interact with DsbA in periplasm.

8475042	Engineering cysteine mutants to obtain crystallographic phases with a cutinase from Fusarium solani pisi.Cutinases are extracellular enzymes involved in the disruption of cutine, an insoluble polyester which covers the surface of plants. They belong to a class of serine esterases that are able to hydrolyse fatty acid esters and emulsified triglycerides as efficiently as lipases, but without displaying interfacial activation. Classical crystallographic methods for obtaining heavy-atom derivatives failed, so the cutinase structure has been solved exclusively by the multiple isomorphous replacement method using four Hg derivatives obtained from mutants S4C, S92C, S120C and S129C. Two of these derivatives behaved as expected: (i) the cys mutant of the catalytic Ser S120C, located at the surface of the active site pocket, leads to a good derivative; and (ii) the Hg atom of the derivative obtained with the S92C mutant is completely accessible to the solvent and occupies two alternative positions--consequently a poor derivative results. In contrast, two mutants show an unexpected behaviour: (i) the Hg atom in the S129C mutant was completely buried 10 A below the protein surface and yielded the best derivative; and (ii) a poor quality derivative was obtained with the S4C mutant. Cys 4 belongs to the disordered propeptide 1-16. The Cys 4 bound Hg atom is located in front of the Asp58 side chain, but neither Cys4 nor parts of the propeptide are clearly visible in the electron density maps of the derivative structure.

9466928	The effects of steric mutations on the structure of type III antifreeze protein and its interaction with ice.The interaction of proteins with ice is poorly understood and difficult to study, partly because ice is transitory and can present many binding surfaces, and partly because structures have been determined for only two ice-binding proteins. This paper focuses on one of these, a 66-residue antifreeze protein (AFP) from eel pout. The high resolution X-ray structure of this fish AFP demonstrated that the proposed ice-binding surface is remarkably flat for such a small protein. The residues on the planar surface thought to be involved in ice binding are restrained by hydrogen bonds or by tight packing of their side-chains. To probe the requirement for a flat binding surface, a conserved alanine in the center of the AFP planar surface was substituted with larger residues. Six alanine replacement mutants (Ala16 > Cys, Thr, Met, Arg, His and Tyr), designed to disrupt the planarity of the surface and sterically block binding to ice, were characterized by X-ray crystallography and compared with the wild-type AFP. In each case, the detail provided by these crystal structures has helped explain the effects of the mutation on antifreeze activity. The substitutions, Ala16 > His and Ala16 > Tyr, were large enough to shield Gln44, one of the putative ice-binding residues, contributing to their very low thermal hysteresis activity. In addition to sterically hindering the putative ice-binding site, the bulkier residues also caused shifts in the putative ice-binding residues owing to the tight packing of side-chains on the planar surface. This unexpected consequence of the mutations helps account for the severely reduced antifreeze activity. One explanation for residual antifreeze activity in some of the mutants lies in the possibility that AFPs have a role in shaping the site on the ice to which they bind. Thus, side-chain dislocations might be partially accommodated by ice that can freeze around them. It is evident that the disruption of the planarity, by introducing larger residues at the center of the proposed ice-binding site, is not the only factor responsible for the loss of antifreeze activity. There are multiple causes including positional change and steric blockage of some putative ice-binding residues.

8918534	Structural analysis of a mutation in canine parvovirus which controls antigenicity and host range.A single mutation in canine parvovirus (CPV) of VP2 residue 300 from alanine to aspartic acid causes a loss of canine host range and alters the antigenic properties of the virus. The three-dimensional structure of this mutant has been solved to 3.25 A resolution. Crystals of full particles were triclinic, with cell dimensions of a = 267.6, b = 268.5, c = 274.3 A. alpha = 61.9, beta = 62.6, and gamma = 60.2 degrees. The native structure of CPV was used as an initial model. Phases were improved by real-space electron density averaging. In spite of the relative low percentage of observed reflections (32.5% of the data between 15.0 and 3.25 A resolution), the presence of 60-fold noncrystallographic redundancy allowed the averaging procedure to converge smoothly. The mutant aspartic acid at residue 300 forms a salt bridge with Arg81 in an icosahedrally threefold-related subunit, inducing local changes within the antigenic site B on the CPV surface. In addition, the loop between residues 359 and 374 adopts a conformation similar to that displayed by feline panleukopenia virus. The ability of the Ala300-->Asp mutant to evade antibody binding can be associated with the change of charge distribution and structure in the antigenic binding site. The variation in host range behavior may be due to the increased stability as a result of formation of the salt bridge between adjacent subunits.

15843024	Structural insights into fusidic acid resistance and sensitivity in EF-G.Fusidic acid (FA) is a steroid antibiotic commonly used against Gram positive bacterial infections. It inhibits protein synthesis by stalling elongation factor G (EF-G) on the ribosome after translocation. A significant number of the mutations conferring strong FA resistance have been mapped at the interfaces between domains G, III and V of EF-G. However, direct information on how such mutations affect the structure has hitherto not been available. Here we present the crystal structures of two mutants of Thermus thermophilus EF-G, G16V and T84A, which exhibit FA hypersensitivity and resistance in vitro, respectively. These mutants also have higher and lower affinity for GTP respectively than wild-type EF-G. The mutations cause significant conformational changes in the switch II loop that have opposite effects on the position of a key residue, Phe90, which undergoes large conformational changes. This correlates with the importance of Phe90 in FA sensitivity reported in previous studies. These structures substantiate the importance of the domain G/domain III/domain V interfaces as a key component of the FA binding site. The mutations also cause subtle changes in the environment of the "P-loop lysine", Lys25. This led us to examine the conformation of the equivalent residue in all structures of translational GTPases, which revealed that EF-G and eEF2 form a group separate from the others and suggested that the role of Lys25 may be different in the two groups.

15794647	Ligand migration and protein fluctuations in myoglobin mutant L29W.We have determined eight X-ray structures of myoglobin mutant L29W at various experimental conditions. In addition, infrared spectroscopic experiments are presented, which are discussed in the light of the X-ray structures. Two distinct conformations of the CO-ligated protein were identified, giving rise to two stretching bands of heme-bound CO. If L29W MbCO crystals are illuminated around 180 K, a deoxy species is formed. The CO molecules migrate to the proximal side of the heme and remain trapped in the so-called Xe1 cavity upon temperature decrease to 105 K. The structure of this photoproduct is almost identical to the equilibrium high-temperature deoxy Mb structure. If the temperature is cycled to increasingly higher values, CO recombination is observed. Three intermediate structures have been determined during the rebinding process. Efficient recombination occurs only above 180 K, the characteristic temperature for the onset of protein dynamics. Rebinding is remarkably slow because bulky residues His64 and Trp29 block important migration pathways of the CO molecule.

1881877	1.59 A structure of trypsin at 120 K: comparison of low temperature and room temperature structures.The structure of a rat trypsin mutant [S195C] at a temperature of 120 K has been refined to a crystallographic R factor of 17.4% between 12.0 and 1.59 A and is compared with the structure of the D102N mutant at 295 K. A reduction in the unit cell dimensions in going from room temperature to low temperature is accompanied by a decrease in molecular surface area and radius of gyration. The overall structure remains similar to that at room temperature. The attainable resolution appears to be improved due to the decrease in the fall off of intensities with resolution [reduction of the temperature factor]. This decreases the uncertainty in the atomic positions and allows the localization of more protein atoms and solvent molecules in the low temperature map. The largest differences between the two models occur at residues with higher than average temperature factors. Several features can be localized in the solvent region of the 120 K map that are not seen in the 295 K map. These include several more water molecules as well as an interstitial sulfate ion and two interstitial benzamidine molecules.

9558361	Chemical rescue of Klebsiella aerogenes urease variants lacking the carbamylated-lysine nickel ligand.Klebsiella aerogenes urease possesses a dinuclear metallocenter in which two nickel atoms are bridged by carbamylated Lys217. To assess whether carbamate-specific chemistry is required for urease activity, site-directed mutagenesis and chemical rescue strategies were combined in efforts to place a carboxylate group at the location of this metal ligand. Urease variants with Lys217 replaced by Glu, Cys, and Ala (K217E, K217C/C319A, and K217A proteins) were purified, shown to be activated by incubation with small organic acids plus Ni(II), and structurally characterized. K217C/C319A urease possessed a second change in which Cys319 was replaced by Ala in order to facilitate efforts to chemically modify Cys217; however, this covalent modification approach did not produce active urease. Chemical rescue of the K217E, K217C/C319A, and K217A variants required 2, 2, and 10 h, respectively, to reach maximal activity levels. The highest activity generated [224 micromol of urea degraded.min-1.(mg of protein)-1, for K217C/C319A urease incubated with 500 mM formic acid and 10 mM Ni at pH 6.5] corresponded to 56% of that measured for in vitro activation of the wild-type apoprotein. While the K217E apoprotein showed minimal structural perturbations, the K217C/C319A apoprotein showed a disordering of some active site residues, and the K217A apoprotein revealed a repositioning of His219 to allow the formation of a hydrogen bond with Thr169, thus replacing the hydrogen bond between the amino group of Lys217 and Thr169 in the native enzyme. Importantly, these structures allow rationalization of the relative rates and yields of chemical rescue experiments. The crystal structures of chemically rescued K217A and K217C/C319A ureases revealed a return of the active site residues to their wild-type positions. In both cases, noncovalently bound formate was structurally equivalent to the Lys-carbamate as the bridging metallocenter ligand. We conclude that carbamate-specific chemistry is not required for urease catalysis.

9405053	Active site of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase A from Lactococcus lactis investigated by chemical modification and mutagenesis.The flavin-containing enzyme dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHOD) catalyzes the oxidation of dihydroorotate (DHO) to orotate, the first aromatic intermediate in pyrimidine biosynthesis. The first structure of a DHOD, the A form of the enzyme from Lactococcus lactis, has recently become known, and some conserved residues were suggested to have a role in the active site [Rowland et al. (1997) Structure 2, 239-252]. In particular, Cys 130 was hypothesized to work as a base, which activates dihydroorotate (DHO) for hydride transfer. By chemical modification and site-directed mutagenesis we have obtained results consistent with this proposal. Cys 130 was susceptible to alkylating reagents, and mutants of Cys 130 (C130A and C130S) showed hardly detectable enzyme activity at pH 8.0, while at pH 10 the C130S mutant enzyme had approximately 1% of wild-type activity. Mutants of Lys 43, Asn 132, and Lys 164 were also constructed. Exchange of Lys 43 to Ala or Glu (K43A and K43E) and of Asn 132 to Ala (N132A) affected both catalysis and substrate binding. Expressed as kcat/KM for DHO, the deterioration of these three mutant enzymes was 10(3)-10(4)-fold. Flavin spectra of the mutant enzymes were not, like the wild-type enzyme, bleached by DHO in stopped-flow experiments, showing that they were deficient with respect to the first half-reaction, namely reduction of FMN by DHO, which was not rate limiting for the wild-type enzyme. The binding interaction between flavin and the reaction product, orotate, could be monitored by a red shift of the flavin absorbance in the wild-type enzyme. The C130A, C130S, and N132A mutant enzymes displayed similar capacity to bind orotate. In contrast, orotate did not change the absorption spectra of the K43 mutant enzymes, although it did inhibit their activity. All of the mutant enzymes, except K164A, contained normal levels of flavin. The results are discussed in relation to the structures of DHODA and other flavoenzymes. The possible acid-base chemistry of Cys 130 is compared to previous work on mammalian dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenases, flavoenzymes, which catalyze the reversed reaction, namely the reduction of pyrimidine bases.

16288913	Asp79 makes a large, unfavorable contribution to the stability of RNase Sa.The two most buried carboxyl groups in ribonuclease Sa (RNase Sa) are Asp33 (99% buried; pK 2.4) and Asp79 (85% buried; pK 7.4). Above these pK values, the stability of the D33A variant is 6kcal/mol less than wild-type RNase Sa, and the stability of the D79A variant is 3.3kcal/mol greater than wild-type RNase Sa. The key structural difference between the carboxyl groups is that Asp33 forms three intramolecular hydrogen bonds, and Asp79 forms no intramolecular hydrogen bond. Here, we focus on Asp79 and describe studies of 11 Asp79 variants. Most of the variants were at least 2kcal/mol more stable than wild-type RNase Sa, and the most interesting was D79F. At pH 3, below the pK of Asp79, RNase Sa is 0.3kcal/mol more stable than the D79F variant. At pH 8.5, above the pK of Asp79, RNase Sa is 3.7kcal/mol less stable than the D79F variant. The unfavorable contribution of Asp79 to the stability appears to result from the Born self-energy of burying the charge and, more importantly, from unfavorable charge-charge interactions. To counteract the effect of the negative charge on Asp79, we prepared the Q94K variant and the crystal structure showed that the amino group of the Lys formed a hydrogen-bonded ion pair (distance, 2.71A; angle, 100 degrees ) with the carboxyl group of Asp79. The stability of the Q94K variant was about the same as the wild-type at pH 3, where Asp79 is uncharged, but 1kcal/mol greater than that of wild-type RNase Sa at pH 8.5, where Asp79 is charged. Differences in hydrophobicity, steric strain, Born self-energy, and electrostatic interactions all appear to contribute to the range of stabilities observed in the variants. When it is possible, replacing buried, non-hydrogen bonded, ionizable side-chains with non-polar side-chains is an excellent means of increasing protein stability.

14661963	Infrared spectroscopic and mutational studies on putidaredoxin-induced conformational changes in ferrous CO-P450cam.Ferrous-carbon monoxide bound form of cytochrome P450cam (CO-P450cam) has two infrared (IR) CO stretching bands at 1940 and 1932 cm(-1). The former band is dominant (>95% in area) for CO-P450cam free of putidaredoxin (Pdx), while the latter band is dominant (>95% in area) in the complex of CO-P450cam with reduced Pdx. The binding of Pdx to CO-P450cam thus evokes a conformational change in the heme active site. To study the mechanism involved in the conformational change, surface amino acid residues Arg79, Arg109, and Arg112 in P450cam were replaced with Lys, Gln, and Met. IR spectroscopic and kinetic analyses of the mutants revealed that an enzyme that has a larger 1932 cm(-1) band area upon Pdx-binding has a larger catalytic activity. Examination of the crystal structures of R109K and R112K suggested that the interaction between the guanidium group of Arg112 and Pdx is important for the conformational change. The mutations did not change a coupling ratio between the hydroxylation product and oxygen consumed. We interpret these findings to mean that the interaction of P450cam with Pdx through Arg112 enhances electron donation from the proximal ligand (Cys357) to the O-O bond of iron-bound O(2) and, possibly, promotes electron transfer from reduced Pdx to oxyP450cam, thereby facilitating the O-O bond splitting.

11513582	Crystal structure of thrombin-ecotin reveals conformational changes and extended interactions.The protease inhibitor ecotin fails to inhibit thrombin despite its broad specificity against serine proteases. A point mutation (M84R) in ecotin results in a 1.5 nM affinity for thrombin, 10(4) times stronger than that of wild-type ecotin. The crystal structure of bovine thrombin is determined in complex with ecotin M84R mutant at 2.5 A resolution. Surface loops surrounding the active site cleft of thrombin have undergone significant structural changes to permit inhibitor binding. Particularly, the insertion loops at residues 60 and 148 in thrombin, which likely mediate the interactions with macromolecules, are displaced when the complex forms. Thrombin and ecotin M84R interact in two distinct surfaces. The loop at residue 99 and the C-terminus of thrombin contact ecotin through mixed polar and nonpolar interactions. The active site of thrombin is filled with eight consecutive amino acids of ecotin and demonstrates thrombin's preference for specific features that are compatible with the thrombin cleavage site: negatively charged-Pro-Val-X-Pro-Arg-hydrophobic-positively charged (P1 Arg is in bold letters). The preference for a Val at P4 is clearly defined. The insertion at residue 60 may further affect substrate binding by moving its adjacent loops that are part of the substrate recognition sites.

8663370	Thermal stability of hexameric and tetrameric nucleoside diphosphate kinases. Effect of subunit interaction.The eukaryotic nucleoside diphosphate (NDP) kinases are hexamers, while the bacterial NDP kinases are tetramers made of small, single domain subunits. These enzymes represent an ideal model for studying the effect of subunit interaction on protein stability. The thermostability of NDP kinases of each class was studied by differential scanning calorimetry and biochemical methods. The hexameric NDP kinase from Dictyostelium discoideum displays one single, irreversible differential scanning calorimetry peak (Tm 62 degrees C) over a broad protein concentration, indicating a single step denaturation. The thermal stability of the protein was increased by ADP. The P105G substitution, which affects a loop implicated in subunit contacts, yields a protein that reversibly dissociates to folded monomers at 38 degrees C before the irreversible denaturation occurs (Tm 47 degrees C). ADP delays the dissociation, but does not change the Tm. These data indicate a "coupling" of the quaternary structure with the tertiary structure in the wild-type, but not in the mutated protein. We describe the x-ray structure of the P105G mutant at 2.2-A resolution. It is very similar to that of the wild-type protein. Therefore, a minimal change in the structure leads to a dramatic change of protein thermostability. The NDP kinase from Escherichia coli behaves like the P105G mutant of the Dictyostelium NDP kinase. The detailed study of their thermostability is important, since biological effects of thermolabile NDP kinases have been described in several organisms.

1525170	Enthalpic destabilization of a mutant human lysozyme lacking a disulfide bridge between cysteine-77 and cysteine-95.To understand the role of disulfide bridges in protein stability, the thermodynamic changes in the denaturation of two mutant human lysozymes lacking a disulfide bridge between Cys-77 and Cys-95 (C77A and C77/95A) were analyzed using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). At pH 3.0 and 57 degrees C, the stabilities of both the C77A and C77/95A mutants were decreased about 4.6 kcal.mol-1 in Gibbs free energy change. Under the same conditions, the enthalpy changes (delta H) were 94.8 and 90.8 kcal.mol-1, respectively, which were smaller than that of the wild type (100.8 kcal.mol-1). The destabilization of the mutants was caused by enthalpic factors. Although X-ray crystallography indicated that the mutants preserve the wild-type tertiary structure, removal of the disulfide bridge increased the flexibility of the native state of the mutants. This was indicated both by an increase in the crystallographic thermal factors (B-factors) and by a decrease in the affinity of N-acetylglucosamine trimer [(NAG)3] observed using isothermal titration calorimetry (DTC) due to entropic effects. Thus, the effect of cross-linking on the stability of a protein is not solely explained by the entropy change in denaturation.

12927546	Three dimensional structures of S189D chymotrypsin and D189S trypsin mutants: the effect of polarity at site 189 on a protease-specific stabilization of the substrate-binding site.The crystal structure of S189D rat chymotrypsin have been determined (resolution 2.55A) and compared, together with D189S rat trypsin to wild-type structures to examine why these single mutations resulted in poorly active, non-specific enzymes instead of converting the specificities of trypsin and chymotrypsin into each other. Both mutants have stable structure but suffer from a surprisingly large number of serious deformations. These are restricted to the activation domain, mainly to the substrate-binding region and are larger in S189D chymotrypsin. A wild-type substrate-binding mode in the mutants is disfavored by substantial displacements of the Cys191-Cys220 disulfide and loop segments 185-195 (loop C2/D2) and 217-224 (loop E2/F2) at the specificity site. As a consequence, the substrate-binding clefts become wider and more solvent-accessible in the middle third and occluded in the lower third. Interestingly, while the Ser189 residue in D189S trypsin adopts a chymotrypsin-like conformation, the Asp189 residue in S189D chymotrypsin is turned out toward the solvent. The rearrangements in D189S trypsin are at the same sites where trypsin and trypsinogen differ and, in S189D chymotrypsin, the oxyanion hole as well as the salt-bridge between Asp194 and the N-terminal of Ile16 are missing as in chymotrypsinogen. Despite these similarities, the mutants do not have zymogen conformation. The Ser189Asp and Asp189Ser substitutions are structurally so disruptive probably because the stabilization of such a different specificity site polarities as those after the removal or introduction of a charged residue are beyond the capability of the wild-type conformation of the substrate-binding region.

16216071	C-terminal tyrosine of ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase in hydride transfer processes with NAD(P)+/H.Ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase (FNR) catalyzes the reduction of NADP+ to NADPH in an overall reversible reaction, showing some differences in the mechanisms between cyanobacterial and higher plant FNRs. During hydride transfer it is proposed that the FNR C-terminal Tyr is displaced by the nicotinamide. Thus, this C-terminal Tyr might be involved not only in modulating the flavin redox properties, as already shown, but also in nicotinamide binding and hydride transfer. FNR variants from the cyanobacterium Anabaena in which the C-terminal Tyr has been replaced by Trp, Phe, or Ser have been produced. All FNR variants show enhanced NADP+ and NAD+ binding, especially Tyr303Ser, which correlates with a noticeable improvement of NADH-dependent reactions. Nevertheless, the Tyr303Ser variant shows a decrease in the steady-state kcat value with NADPH. Fast kinetic analysis of the hydride transfer shows that the low efficiency observed for this mutant FNR under steady-state conditions is not due to a lack of catalytic ability but rather to the strong enzyme-coenzyme interaction. Three-dimensional structures for Tyr303Ser and Tyr303Trp variants and its complexes with NADP+ show significant differences between plant and cyanobacterial FNRs. Our results suggest that modulation of coenzyme affinity is highly influenced by the strength of the C-terminus-FAD interaction and that subtle changes between plant and cyanobacterial structures are able to modify the energy of that interaction. Additionally, it is shown that the C-terminal Tyr of FNR lowers the affinity for NADP+/H to levels compatible with steady-state turnover during the catalytic cycle, but it is not involved in the hydride transfer itself.

12649440	Intermolecular ion pairs maintain the toroidal structure of Pyrococcus furiosus PCNA.Two mutant proliferating cell nuclear antigens from the hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus, PfuPCNA(D143A) and PfuPCNA(D143A/D147A), were prepared by site-specific mutagenesis. The results from gel filtration showed that mutations at D143 and D147 drastically affect the stability of the trimeric structure of PfuPCNA. The PfuPCNA(D143A) still retained the activity to stimulate the DNA polymerase reaction, but PfuPCNA(D143A/D147A) lost the activity. Crystal structures of the mutant PfuPCNAs were determined. Although the wild-type PCNA forms a toroidal trimer with intermolecular hydrogen bonds between the N- and C-terminal domains, the mutant PfuPCNAs exist as V-shaped dimers through intermolecular hydrogen bonds between the two C-terminal domains in the crystal. Because the mutated residues are involved in the intermolecular ion pairs through their side chains in the wild-type PfuPCNA, these ion pairs seem to play a key role in maintaining the toroidal structure of the PfuPCNA trimer. The comparison of the crystal structures revealed intriguing conformational flexibility of each domain in the PfuPCNA subunit. This structural versatility of PCNA may be involved in the mechanisms for ring opening and closing.

8176740	Solvent rearrangement in an antigen-antibody interface introduced by site-directed mutagenesis of the antibody combining site.The three-dimensional structure of a site-directed mutant of the bacterially expressed Fv fragment from monoclonal antibody D1.3, complexed to the specific antigen lysozyme has been determined to a nominal resolution of 1.8 A using X-ray diffraction data. The replacement of VL Trp92 by Asp allows two water molecules to occupy space taken by Trp92 in the wild-type complex, in agreement with a previous observation that water molecules play an important role in stabilizing this antigen-antibody complex. The equilibrium constant for the binding of the mutant Fv to the antigen decreases by three orders of magnitude (from 2.3 x 10(8) M-1 to 2.6 x 10(5) M-1). Titration calorimetry shows that this results from a smaller negative binding enthalpy (delta delta H = -16 kJ mol-1 at 24 degrees C), whereas the value of the binding entropy is not affected. Since in the complex between the mutated Fv and antigen the buried area has decreased relative to that of the wild-type Fv by about 150 A2, the contribution of the buried unit area to the decrease in free energy (delta Gzero) is approximately 117 J mol-1 (28 cal mol-1) per A2. The loss of interatomic contacts in replacing Trp by Asp permits an approximate calculation for the contribution of van der Waals interactions made by Trp92 in this complex, which gives an average of 2.1 kJ mol-1 (0.5 kcal mol-1) for contacts between carbon atoms.

2684274	Large increases in general stability for subtilisin BPN' through incremental changes in the free energy of unfolding.Six individual amino acid substitutions at separate positions in the tertiary structure of subtilisin BPN' (EC 3.4.21.14) were found to increase the stability of this enzyme, as judged by differential scanning calorimetry and decreased rates of thermal inactivation. These stabilizing changes, N218S, G169A, Y217K, M50F, Q206C, and N76D, were discovered through the use of five different investigative approaches: (1) random mutagenesis; (2) design of buried hydrophobic side groups; (3) design of electrostatic interactions at Ca2+ binding sites; (4) sequence homology consensus; and (5) serendipity. Individually, the six amino acid substitutions increase the delta G of unfolding between 0.3 and 1.3 kcal/mol at 58.5 degrees C. The combination of these six individual stabilizing mutations together into one subtilisin BPN' molecule was found to result in approximately independent and additive increases in the delta G of unfolding to give a net increase of 3.8 kcal/mol (58.5 degrees C). Thermodynamic stability was also shown to be related to resistance to irreversible inactivation, which included elevated temperatures (65 degrees C) or extreme alkalinity (pH 12.0). Under these denaturing conditions, the rate of inactivation of the combination variant is approximately 300 times slower than that of the wild-type subtilisin BPN'. A comparison of the 1.8-A-resolution crystal structures of mutant and wild-type enzymes revealed only independent and localized structural changes around the site of the amino acid side group substitutions.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

1553543	Response of a protein structure to cavity-creating mutations and its relation to the hydrophobic effect.Six "cavity-creating" mutants, Leu46----Ala (L46A), L99A, L118A, L121A, L133A, and Phe153----Ala (F153A), were constructed within the hydrophobic core of phage T4 lysozyme. The substitutions decreased the stability of the protein at pH 3.0 by different amounts, ranging from 2.7 kilocalories per mole (kcal mol-1) for L46A and L121A to 5.0 kcal mol-1 for L99A. The double mutant L99A/F153A was also constructed and decreased in stability by 8.3 kcal mol-1. The x-ray structures of all of the variants were determined at high resolution. In every case, removal of the wild-type side chain allowed some of the surrounding atoms to move toward the vacated space but a cavity always remained, which ranged in volume from 24 cubic angstroms (A3) for L46A to 150 A3 for L99A. No solvent molecules were observed in any of these cavities. The destabilization of the mutant Leu----Ala proteins relative to wild type can be approximated by a constant term (approximately 2.0 kcal mol-1) plus a term that increases in proportion to the size of the cavity. The constant term is approximately equal to the transfer free energy of leucine relative to alanine as determined from partitioning between aqueous and organic solvents. The energy term that increases with the size of the cavity can be expressed either in terms of the cavity volume (24 to 33 cal mol-1 A-3) or in terms of the cavity surface area (20 cal mol-1 A-2). The results suggest how to reconcile a number of conflicting reports concerning the strength of the hydrophobic effect in proteins.

8987974	X-ray crystallographic studies of alanine-65 variants of carbonic anhydrase II reveal the structural basis of compromised proton transfer in catalysis.The three-dimensional structures of A65F, A65L, A65H, A65T, A65S, and A65G human carbonic anhydrase II (CAII) variants have been solved by X-ray crystallographic methods to probe the importance of residue 65 and the structural implications of its evolutionary drift in the greater family of carbonic anhydrase isozymes. Structure-activity relationships in this series of CAII variants are correlated with those established for other carbonic anhydrase isozymes. We conclude that a bulky side chain at position 65 hinders the formation of an effective solvent bridge between zinc-bound water and H64 and thereby hinders solvent-mediated proton transfer between these two groups [Jackman, J. E., Merz, K. M., Jr., & Fierke, C. A. (1996) Biochemistry 35, 16421-16428]. Despite the introduction of a polar hydroxyl group at this position, smaller side chains such as serine or threonine substituted for A65 do not perturb the formation of a solvent bridge between H64 and zinc-bound solvent. Thus, the evolution of residue 65 size is one factor affecting the trajectory of catalytic proton transfer.

3663686	The roles of conserved aromatic amino-acid residues in the active site of human lysozyme: a site-specific mutagenesis study.In order to probe the roles of Tyr-63, Trp-64 and Trp-109 in the active site of human lysozyme (peptidoglycan N-acetylmuramoylhydrolase, EC 3.2.1.17), six human lysozymes containing a mutation, Tyr-63 to Leu, Trp-64 to Phe or Tyr, Trp-109 to Phe or Tyr, and Glu-35 to Asp, were newly synthesized and their immunological and enzymatical activities were examined in comparison with the native enzyme. Enzymatic characterization indicated: (i) that the existences of an aromatic residue at position 63 and a tryptophan residue at position 64 are essential for the effective hydrolysis of glycol chitin substrate, but not for the lysis of bacterial substrate; (ii) that the conversion of Trp-109 to Phe or Tyr reduces the maximal velocity of the lytic reaction to 25% of the wild-type enzyme; however, the apparent affinity constant is not affected. Further, the difference between the activity against the charged substrate and that against the non-charged substrate was discussed from a viewpoint of the electrostatic interaction between enzyme and substrate.

11112523	Estimation of the hydrophobic effect in an antigen-antibody protein-protein interface.Antigen-antibody complexes provide useful models for analyzing the thermodynamics of protein-protein association reactions. We have employed site-directed mutagenesis, X-ray crystallography, and isothermal titration calorimetry to investigate the role of hydrophobic interactions in stabilizing the complex between the Fv fragment of the anti-hen egg white lysozyme (HEL) antibody D1.3 and HEL. Crystal structures of six FvD1.3-HEL mutant complexes in which an interface tryptophan residue (V(L)W92) has been replaced by residues with smaller side chains (alanine, serine, valine, aspartate, histidine, and phenylalanine) were determined to resolutions between 1.75 and 2.00 A. In the wild-type complex, V(L)W92 occupies a large hydrophobic pocket on the surface of HEL and constitutes an energetic "hot spot" for antigen binding. The losses in apolar buried surface area in the mutant complexes, relative to wild-type, range from 25 (V(L)F92) to 115 A(2) (V(L)A92), with no significant shifts in the positions of protein atoms at the mutation site for any of the complexes except V(L)A92, where there is a peptide flip. The affinities of the mutant Fv fragments for HEL are 10-100-fold lower than that of the original antibody. Formation of all six mutant complexes is marked by a decrease in binding enthalpy that exceeds the decrease in binding free energy, such that the loss in enthalpy is partly offset by a compensating gain in entropy. No correlation was observed between decreases in apolar, polar, or aggregate (sum of the apolar and polar) buried surface area in the V(L)92 mutant series and changes in the enthalpy of formation. Conversely, there exist linear correlations between losses of apolar buried surface and decreases in binding free energy (R(2) = 0.937) as well as increases in the solvent portion of the entropy of binding (R(2) = 0.909). The correlation between binding free energy and apolar buried surface area corresponds to 21 cal mol(-1) A(-2) (1 cal = 4.185 J) for the effective hydrophobicity at the V(L)92 mutation site. Furthermore, the slope of the line defined by the correlation between changes in binding free energy and solvent entropy approaches unity, demonstrating that the exclusion of solvent from the binding interface is the predominant energetic factor in the formation of this protein complex. Our estimate of the hydrophobic contribution to binding at site V(L)92 in the D1.3-HEL interface is consistent with values for the hydrophobic effect derived from classical hydrocarbon solubility models. We also show how residue V(L)W92 can contribute significantly less to stabilization when buried in a more polar pocket, illustrating the dependence of the hydrophobic effect on local environment at different sites in a protein-protein interface.

15723541	Kinetic and crystallographic analysis of active site mutants of Escherichia coli gamma-aminobutyrate aminotransferase.The E. coli isozyme of gamma-aminobutyrate aminotransferase (GABA-AT) is a tetrameric pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzyme that catalyzes transamination between primary amines and alpha-keto acids. The roles of the active site residues V241, E211, and I50 in the GABA-AT mechanism have been probed by site-directed mutagenesis. The beta-branched side chain of V241 facilitates formation of external aldimine intermediates with primary amine substrates, while E211 provides charge compensation of R398 selectively in the primary amine half-reaction and I50 forms a hydrophobic lid at the top of the substrate binding site. The structures of the I50Q, V241A, and E211S mutants were solved by X-ray crystallography to resolutions of 2.1, 2.5, and 2.52 A, respectively. The structure of GABA-AT is similar in overall fold and active site structure to that of dialkylglycine decarboxylase, which catalyzes both transamination and decarboxylation half-reactions in its normal catalytic cycle. Therefore, an attempt was made to convert GABA-AT into a decarboxylation-dependent aminotransferase similar to dialkylglycine decarboxylase by systematic mutation of E. coli GABA-AT active site residues. Two of the twelve mutants presented, E211S/I50G/C77K and E211S/I50H/V80D, have approximately 10-fold higher decarboxylation activities than the wild-type enzyme, and the E211S/I50H/V80D has formally changed the reaction specificity to that of a decarboxylase.

11069910	Roles of active site and novel K+ ion-binding site residues in human mitochondrial branched-chain alpha-ketoacid decarboxylase/dehydrogenase.The human mitochondrial branched-chain alpha-ketoacid decarboxylase/dehydrogenase (BCKD) is a heterotetrameric (alpha(2)beta(2)) thiamine diphosphate (TDP)-dependent enzyme. The recently solved human BCKD structure at 2.7 A showed that the two TDP-binding pockets are located at the interfaces between alpha and beta' subunits and between alpha' and beta subunits. In the present study, we show that the E76A-beta' mutation results in complete inactivation of BCKD. The result supports the catalytic role of the invariant Glu-76-beta' residue in increasing basicity of the N-4' amino group during the proton abstraction from the C-2 atom on the thiazolium ring. A substitution of His-146-beta' with Ala also renders the enzyme completely inactive. The data are consistent with binding of the alpha-ketoacid substrate by this residue based on the Pseudomonas BCKD structure. Alterations in Asn-222-alpha, Tyr-224-alpha, or Glu-193-alpha, which coordinates to the Mg(2+) ion, result in an inactive enzyme (E193A-alpha) or a mutant BCKD with markedly higher K(m) for TDP and a reduced level of the bound cofactor (Y224A-alpha and N222S-alpha). Arg-114-alpha, Arg-220-alpha, and His-291-alpha interact with TDP by directly binding to phosphate oxygens of the cofactor. We show that natural mutations of these residues in maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) patients (R114W-alpha and R220W-alpha) or site-directed mutagenesis (H291A-alpha) also result in an inactive or partially active enzyme, respectively. Another MSUD mutation (T166M-alpha), which affects one of the residues that coordinate to the K(+) ion on the alpha subunit, also causes inactivation of the enzyme and an attenuated ability to bind TDP. In addition, fluorescence measurements establish that Trp-136-beta in human BCKD is the residue quenched by TDP binding. Thus, our results define the functional roles of key amino acid residues in human BCKD and provide a structural basis for MSUD.

7982928	Probing protein-protein interactions. The ribose-binding protein in bacterial transport and chemotaxis.A number of mutations at Gly134 of the periplasmic ribose-binding protein of Escherichia coli were examined by a combined biochemical and structural approach. Different mutations gave rise to different patterns of effects on the chemotaxis and transport functions. The smallest residue (alanine) had the least effect on transport, whereas large hydrophobic residues had the smallest effect on chemotaxis. Comparison of the x-ray crystal structure of the G134R mutant protein (2.5-A resolution) to that of the wild type (1.6-A resolution) showed that the basic structure of the protein was unaltered. The loss of chemotaxis and transport functions in this and similar mutant proteins must therefore be caused by relatively simple surface effects, which include a change in local main chain conformation. The loss of chemotaxis and transport functions resulting from the introduction of an alanine residue at position 134 was suppressed by an additional isoleucine to threonine mutation at residue 132. An x-ray structure of the I132T/G134A double mutant protein (2.2-A resolution) showed that the changes in local structure were accompanied by a diffuse pattern of structural changes in the surrounding region, implying that the suppression derives from a combination of sources.

15628861	zFP538, a yellow-fluorescent protein from Zoanthus, contains a novel three-ring chromophore.Crystal structures of the tetrameric yellow-fluorescent protein zFP538 from the button polyp Zoanthus sp. and a green-emitting mutant (K66M) are presented. The atomic models have been refined at 2.7 and 2.5 A resolution, with final crystallographic R factors of 0.206 (R(free) = 0.255) and 0.190 (R(free) = 0.295), respectively, and have excellent stereochemistry. The fold of the protomer is very similar to that of green (GFP) and red (DsRed) fluorescent proteins; however, evidence from crystallography and mass spectrometry suggests that zFP538 contains a three-ring chromophore derived from that of GFP. The yellow-emitting species (lambda(em)(max) = 538 nm) is proposed to result from a transimination reaction in which a transiently appearing DsRed-like acylimine is attacked by the terminal amino group of lysine 66 to form a new six-membered ring, cleaving the polypeptide backbone at the 65-66 position. This extends the chromophore conjugation by an additional double bond compared to GFP, lowering the absorption and emission frequencies. Substitution of lysine 66 with aspartate or glutamate partially converts zFP538 into a red-fluorescent protein, providing additional support for an acylimine intermediate. The diverse and unexpected roles of the side chain at position 66 give new insight into the chemistry of chromophore maturation in the extended family of GFP-like proteins.

12033935	Tryptophan 80 and leucine 143 are critical for the hydride transfer step of thymidylate synthase by controlling active site access.Mutant forms of thymidylate synthase (TS) with substitutions at the conserved active site residue, Trp 80, are deficient in the hydride transfer step of the TS reaction. These mutants produce a beta-mercaptoethanol (beta-ME) adduct of the 2'-deoxyuridine-5'-monophosphate (dUMP) exocyclic methylene intermediate. Trp 80 has been proposed to assist hydride transfer by stabilizing a 5,6,7,8-tetrahydrofolate (THF) radical cation intermediate [Barrett, J. E., Lucero, C. M., and Schultz, P. G. (1999) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 121, 7965-7966.] formed after THF changes its binding from the cofactor pocket to a putative alternate site. To understand the molecular basis of hydride transfer deficiency in a mutant in which Trp 80 was changed to Gly, we determined the X-ray structures of this mutant Escherichia coli TS complexed with dUMP and the folate analogue 10-propargyl-5,8-dideazafolate (CB3717) and of the wild-type enzyme complexed with dUMP and THF. The mutant enzyme has a cavity in the active site continuous with bulk solvent. This cavity, sealed from bulk solvent in wild-type TS by Leu 143, would allow nucleophilic attack of beta-ME on the dUMP C5 exocyclic methylene. The structure of the wild-type enzyme/dUMP/THF complex shows that THF is bound in the cofactor binding pocket and is well positioned to transfer hydride to the dUMP exocyclic methylene. Together, these results suggest that THF does not reorient during hydride transfer and indicate that the role of Trp 80 may be to orient Leu 143 to shield the active site from bulk solvent and to optimally position the cofactor for hydride transfer.

8114095	Crystal structure of Escherichia coli thioredoxin reductase refined at 2 A resolution. Implications for a large conformational change during catalysis.The crystal structures of three forms of Escherichia coli thioredoxin reductase have been refined: the oxidized form of the wild-type enzyme at 2.1 A resolution, a variant containing a cysteine to serine mutation at the active site (Cys138Ser) at 2.0 A resolution, and a complex of this variant with nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+) at 2.3 A resolution. The enzyme mechanism involves the transfer of reducing equivalents from reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) to a disulfide bond in the enzyme, via a flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD). Thioredoxin reductase contains FAD and NADPH binding domains that are structurally similar to the corresponding domains of the related enzyme glutathione reductase. The relative orientation of these domains is, however, very different in the two enzymes: when the FAD domains of thioredoxin and glutathione reductases are superimposed, the NADPH domain of one is rotated by 66 degrees with respect to the other. The observed binding mode of NADP+ in thioredoxin reductase is non-productive in that the nicotinamide ring is more than 17 A from the flavin ring system. While in glutathione reductase the redox active disulfide is located in the FAD domain, in thioredoxin reductase it is in the NADPH domain and is part of a four-residue sequence (Cys-Ala-Thr-Cys) that is close in structure to the corresponding region of thioredoxin (Cys-Gly-Pro-Cys), with a root-mean-square deviation of 0.22 A for atoms in the disulfide bonded ring. There are no significant conformational differences between the structure of the wild-type enzyme and that of the Cys138Ser mutant, except that a disulfide bond is not present in the latter. The disulfide bond is positioned productively in this conformation of the enzyme, i.e. it stacks against the flavin ring system in a position that would facilitate its reduction by the flavin. However, the cysteine residues are relatively inaccessible for interaction with the substrate, thioredoxin. These results suggest that thioredoxin reductase must undergo conformational changes during enzyme catalysis. All three structures reported here are for the same conformation of the enzyme and no direct evidence is available as yet for such conformational changes. The simplest possibility is that the NADPH domain rotates between the conformation observed here and an orientation similar to that seen in glutathione reductase. This would alternately place the nicotinamide ring and the disulfide bond near the flavin ring, and expose the cysteine residues for reaction with thioredoxin in the hypothetical conformation.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

8952503	Hydrogen bonding and solvent structure in an antigen-antibody interface. Crystal structures and thermodynamic characterization of three Fv mutants complexed with lysozyme.Using site-directed mutagenesis, X-ray crystallography, and titration calorimetry, we have examined the structural and thermodynamic consequences of removing specific hydrogen bonds in an antigen-antibody interface. Crystal structures of three antibody FvD1.3 mutants, VLTyr50Ser (VLY50S), VHTyr32Ala (VHY32A), and VHTyr101Phe (VHY101F), bound to hen egg white lysozyme (HEL) have been determined at resolutions ranging from 1.85 to 2.10 A. In the wild-type (WT) FvD1.3-HEL complex, the hydroxyl groups of VLTyr50, VHTyr32, and VHTyr101 each form at least one hydrogen bond with the lysozyme antigen. Thermodynamic parameters for antibody-antigen association have been measured using isothermal titration calorimetry, giving equilibrium binding constants Kb (M-1) of 2.6 x 10(7) (VLY50S), 7.0 x 10(7) (VHY32A), and 4.0 x 10(6) (VHY101F). For the WT complex, Kb is 2.7 x 10(8) M-1; thus, the affinities of the mutant Fv fragments for HEL are 10-, 4-, and 70-fold lower than that of the original antibody, respectively. In all three cases entropy compensation results in an affinity loss that would otherwise be larger. Comparison of the three mutant crystal structures with the WT structure demonstrates that the removal of direct antigen-antibody hydrogen bonds results in minimal shifts in the positions of the remaining protein atoms. These observations show that this complex is considerably tolerant, both structurally and thermodynamically, to the truncation of antibody side chains that form hydrogen bonds with the antigen. Alterations in interface solvent structure for two of the mutant complexes (VLY50S and VHY32A) appear to compensate for the unfavorable enthalpy changes when protein-protein interactions are removed. These changes in solvent structure, along with the increased mobility of side chains near the mutation site, probably contribute to the observed entropy compensation. For the VHY101F complex, the nature of the large entropy compensation is not evident from a structural comparison of the WT and mutant complexes. Differences in the local structure and dynamics of the uncomplexed Fv molecules may account for the entropic discrepancy in this case.

10603326	Crystal structure of an inhibitor complex of the 3C proteinase from hepatitis A virus (HAV) and implications for the polyprotein processing in HAV.The proteolytic processing of the viral polyprotein is an essential step during the life cycle of hepatitis A virus (HAV), as it is in all positive-sense, single-stranded RNA viruses of animals. In HAV the 3C proteinase is the only proteolytic activity involved in the polyprotein processing. The specific recognition of the cleavage sites by the 3C proteinase depends on the amino acid sequence of the cleavage site. The structure of the complex of the HAV 3C proteinase and a dipeptide inhibitor has been determined by X-ray crystallography. The double-mutant of HAV 3C (C24S, F82A) was inhibited with the specific inhibitor iodoacetyl-valyl-phenylalanyl-amide. The resulting complex had an acetyl-Val-Phe-amide group covalently attached to the S(gamma) atom of the nucleophilic Cys 172 of the enzyme. Crystals of the complex of HAV 3C (C24S, F82A) acetyl-Val-Phe-amide were found to be monoclinic, space group P2(1), having 4 molecules in the asymmetric unit and diffracting to 1.9-A resolution. The final refined structure consists of 4 molecules of HAV 3C (C24S,F82A) acetyl-Val-Phe-amide, 1 molecule of DMSO, 1 molecule of glycerol, and 514 water molecules. There are considerable conformational differences among the four molecules in the asymmetric unit. The final R-factor is 20.4% for all observed reflections between 15.0- and 1.9-A resolution and the corresponding R(free) is 29.8%. The dipeptide inhibitor is bound to the S(1)(') and S(2)(') specificity subsites of the proteinase. The crystal structure reveals that the HAV 3C proteinase possesses a well-defined S(2)(') specificity pocket and suggests that the P(2)(') residue could be an important determinant for the selection of the primary cleavage site during the polyprotein processing in HAV.

9354379	Analysis of the stabilization of hen lysozyme by helix macrodipole and charged side chain interaction.In the N-terminal region of the alpha-helix of the c-type lysozymes, two Asx residues exist at the 18th and 27th positions. Hen lysozyme has Asp18/Asn27 (18D/27N), and we prepared three mutant lysozymes, Asn18/Asn27 (18N/27N), Asn18/Asp27 (18N/27D), and Asp18/Asp27 (18D/27D). The stability of the wild-type (18D/27N) lysozyme supported the existence of a hydrogen bond between the side chain of Asp18 and the amide group at the N1 position in the alpha-helix, while the stability of the 18N/27D lysozyme supported the presence of the capping box between the Ser24 (N-cap) and Asp27 residues. Although electrostatic repulsion was observed between Asp18 and Asp27 residues in 18D/27D lysozyme, the dissociation of each residue contributed to stabilizing the B-helix in 18D/27D lysozyme through hydrogen bonding and charge-helix macrodipole interaction. This is the first evidence that two neighboring negative charges at the N-terminus of the helix both increased the stability of the protein.

9514271	The response of T4 lysozyme to large-to-small substitutions within the core and its relation to the hydrophobic effect.To further examine the structural and thermodynamic basis of hydrophobic stabilization in proteins, all of the bulky non-polar residues that are buried or largely buried within the core of T4 lysozyme were substituted with alanine. In 25 cases, including eight reported previously, it was possible to determine the crystal structures of the variants. The structures of four variants with double substitutions were also determined. In the majority of cases the "large-to-small" substitutions lead to internal cavities. In other cases declivities or channels open to the surface were formed. In some cases the structural changes were minimal (mainchain shifts < or = 0.3 A); in other cases mainchain atoms moved up to 2 A. In the case of Ile 29 --> Ala the structure collapsed to such a degree that the volume of the putative cavity was zero. Crystallographic analysis suggests that the occupancy of the engineered cavities by solvent is usually low. The mutants Val 149 --> Ala (V149A) and Met 6 --> Ala (M6A), however, are exceptions and have, respectively, one and two well-ordered water molecules within the cavity. The Val 149 --> Ala substitution allows the solvent molecule to hydrogen bond to polar atoms that are occluded in the wild-type molecule. Similarly, the replacement of Met 6 with alanine allows the two solvent molecules to hydrogen bond to each other and to polar atoms on the protein. Except for Val 149 --> Ala the loss of stability of all the cavity mutants can be rationalized as a combination of two terms. The first is a constant for a given class of substitution (e.g., -2.1 kcal/mol for all Leu --> Ala substitutions) and can be considered as the difference between the free energy of transfer of leucine and alanine from solvent to the core of the protein. The second term can be considered as the energy cost of forming the cavity and is consistent with a numerical value of 22 cal mol(-1) A(-3). Physically, this term is due to the loss of van der Waal's interactions between the bulky sidechain that is removed and the atoms that form the wall of the cavity. The overall results are consistent with the prior rationalization of Leu --> Ala mutants in T4 lysozyme by Eriksson et al. (Eriksson et al., 1992, Science 255:178-183).

2372535	Coupling between local structure and global stability of a protein: mutants of staphylococcal nuclease.Staphylococcal nuclease exists in solution as a mixture of two folded (N and N') and two unfolded (U and U*) forms. Earlier workers [Evans et al. (1989) Biochemistry 28, 362] have proposed that the N'/N and U/U* structural differences involve cis/trans isomerization about the Lys116-Pro117 peptide bond with N and U cis and N' and U* trans. The present results show that residue changes throughout the nuclease structure have large effects on the distribution of the N and N'forms. The N'/N ratios at 313 K for nuclease H124L (N'/N = 0.07) and nuclease G79S (N'/N = 12) differ by 2 orders of magnitude. Thermodynamic parameters for equilibria linking the two folded and two unfolded substates were evaluated for seven mutants of nuclease which were found by kinetic assays to have similar enzymatic activities but by NMR spectroscopy to have a wide dispersion of thermal stabilities. Our results indicate that mutational perturbations of the N'/N equilibrium in folded nuclease (delta G for the N in equilibrium N' reaction) are strongly coupled to changes in the stability of the N form (delta G for the N in equilibrium U reaction), but much less so to the stability of the N' form (delta G for the N' in equilibrium U* reaction).

15159559	Short hydrogen bonds in photoactive yellow protein.Eight high-resolution crystal structures of the ground state of photoactive yellow protein (PYP) solved under a variety of conditions reveal that its chromophore is stabilized by two unusually short hydrogen bonds. Both Tyr42 Oeta and Glu46 Oepsilon are separated from the chromophore phenolate oxygen by less than the sum of their atomic van der Waals radii, 2.6 angstroms. This is characteristic of strong hydrogen bonding, in which hydrogen bonds acquire significant covalent character. The hydrogen bond from the protonated Glu46 to the negatively charged phenolate oxygen is 2.58 +/- 0.01 angstroms in length, while that from Tyr42 is considerably shorter, 2.49 +/- 0.01 angstroms. The E46Q mutant was solved to 0.95 angstroms resolution; the isosteric mutation increased the length of the hydrogen bond from Glx46 to the chromophore by 0.29 +/- 0.01 angstroms to that of an average hydrogen bond, 2.88 +/- 0.01 angstroms. The very short hydrogen bond from Tyr42 explains why mutating this residue has such a severe effect on the ground-state structure and PYP photocycle. The effect of isosteric mutations on the photocycle can be largely explained by the alterations to the length and strength of these hydrogen bonds.

9535826	Cryo-crystallography of a true substrate, indole-3-glycerol phosphate, bound to a mutant (alphaD60N) tryptophan synthase alpha2beta2 complex reveals the correct orientation of active site alphaGlu49.The reversible cleavage of indole-3-glycerol by the alpha-subunit of tryptophan synthase has been proposed to be catalyzed by alphaGlu49 and alphaAsp60. Although previous x-ray crystallographic structures of the tryptophan synthase alpha2beta2 complex showed an interaction between the carboxylate of alphaAsp60 and the bound inhibitor indole-3-propanol phosphate, the carboxylate of alphaGlu49 was too distant to play its proposed role. To clarify the structural and functional roles of alphaGlu49, we have determined crystal structures of a mutant (alphaD60N) alpha2beta2 complex in the presence and absence of the true substrate, indole-3-glycerol phosphate. The enzyme in the crystal cleaves indole-3-glycerol phosphate very slowly at room temperature but not under cryo-conditions of 95 K. The structure of the complex with the true substrate obtained by cryo-crystallography reveals that indole-3-glycerol phosphate and indole-3-propanol phosphate have similar binding modes but different torsion angles. Most importantly, the side chain of alphaGlu49 interacts with 3-hydroxyl group of indole-3-glycerol phosphate as proposed. The movement of the side chain of alphaGlu49 into an extended conformation upon binding the true substrate provides evidence for an induced fit mechanism. Our results demonstrate how cryo-crystallography and mutagenesis can provide insight into enzyme mechanism.

16008571	Structural basis for the changed substrate specificity of Drosophila melanogaster deoxyribonucleoside kinase mutant N64D.The Drosophila melanogaster deoxyribonucleoside kinase (Dm-dNK) double mutant N45D/N64D was identified during a previous directed evolution study. This mutant enzyme had a decreased activity towards the natural substrates and decreased feedback inhibition with dTTP, whereas the activity with 3'-modified nucleoside analogs like 3'-azidothymidine (AZT) was nearly unchanged. Here, we identify the mutation N64D as being responsible for these changes. Furthermore, we crystallized the mutant enzyme in the presence of one of its substrates, thymidine, and the feedback inhibitor, dTTP. The introduction of the charged Asp residue appears to destabilize the LID region (residues 167-176) of the enzyme by electrostatic repulsion and no hydrogen bond to the 3'-OH is made in the substrate complex by Glu172 of the LID region. This provides a binding space for more bulky 3'-substituents like the azido group in AZT but influences negatively the interactions between Dm-dNK, substrates and feedback inhibitors based on deoxyribose. The detailed picture of the structure-function relationship provides an improved background for future development of novel mutant suicide genes for Dm-dNK-mediated gene therapy.

11264581	Structures and comparison of the Y98H (2.0 A) and Y98W (1.5 A) mutants of flavodoxin (Desulfovibrio vulgaris).The structures for two mutants at the Tyr98 site of Desulfovibrio vulgaris flavodoxin have been determined. The first, a tyrosine-to-histidine (Y98H) variant, was determined at the moderately high resolution of 2.0 A, while the tyrosine-to-tryptophan variant (Y98W) yielded very high resolution data (beyond 1.5 A) allowing a detailed look at the water structure, alternate side-chain conformations and the planarity of the FMN. Both structures were solved by molecular replacement beginning with the native (P2A) coordinates as a starting point. The Y98H variant of D. vulgaris flavodoxin crystallizes in space group P2(1)2(1)2(1), with unit-cell parameters a = 41.96, b = 61.45, c = 57.04 A, while the Y98W mutant adopts space group P2(1), with a = 41.29, b = 55.82, c = 32.52 A, beta = 100.68 degrees. Refinement for both mutants utilized PROLSQ followed by, for the high-resolution Y98W structure, anisotropic refinement as implemented in SHELXL. Final R factors of 17% for the Y98H mutant and 9.8% for the Y98W mutant were obtained. For the high-resolution (1.5 A) Y98W mutant, 31,010 unique reflections were collected from a single crystal. The final model includes 273 solvent molecules, with eight side chains assuming multiple conformations. At this resolution, the detailed conformation of the FMN can be observed, with both a bow and twist being noted. A comparison is made between the two mutants and the different oxidation states of the native flavodoxin. Although both mutants show similar E(2) (oxidized/semiquinone) one-electron redox potentials to the native, the E(1) (semiquinone/hydroquinone) redox potential for the Y98H mutant is significantly different from that of the Y98W variant and the native protein. The surprising similarity in the folding of the polypeptide chain 60--64 between the two mutants and the reduced states of the native is discussed. The interaction between O61 and N5 in the flavin is discussed because of the new conformation of this loop.

10828980	Crystal structure and iron-binding properties of the R210K mutant of the N-lobe of human lactoferrin: implications for iron release from transferrins.Lactoferrin (Lf) and serum transferrin (Tf) combine high-affinity iron binding with an ability to release this iron at reduced pH. Lf, however, retains iron to significantly lower pH than Tf, giving the two proteins distinct functional roles. In this paper, we compared the iron-release profiles for human Lf, Tf, and their N-lobe half-molecules Lf(N) and Tf(N) and showed that half of the difference in iron retention at low pH ( approximately 1.3 pH units) results from interlobe interactions in Lf. To probe factors intrinsic to the N-lobes, we further examined the specific role of two basic residues that are proposed to form a pH-sensitive dilysine trigger for iron release in the N-lobe of Tf [Dewan, J. C., Mikami, B., Hirose, M., and Sacchettini, J. C. (1993) Biochemistry 32, 11963-11968] by mutating Arg 210 to Lys in the N-lobe half-molecule Lf(N). The R210K mutant was expressed, purified, and crystallized, and its crystal structure was determined and refined at 2.0-A resolution to a final R factor (R(free)) of 19.8% (25.0%). The structure showed that Lys 210 and Lys 301 in R210K do not form a dilysine interaction like that between Lys 206 and Lys 296 in human Tf. The R210K mutant retained iron to lower pH than Tf(N), consistent with the absence of the dilysine interaction but released iron at approximately 0.7 pH units higher than Lf(N). We conclude that (i) the ability of Lf to retain iron to significantly lower pH than Tf is due equally to interlobe interactions and to the absence in Lfs of an interaction analogous to the dilysine pair in Tfs, even when two lysines are present at the corresponding sequence positions, and (ii) an appropriately positioned basic residue (Arg 210 in human Lf) modulates iron release by inhibiting protonation of the N-lobe iron ligands, specifically His 253.

14756552	Structural basis for the exocellulase activity of the cellobiohydrolase CbhA from Clostridium thermocellum.Numerous bacterial and fungal organisms have evolved elaborate sets of modular glycoside hydrolases and similar enzymes aimed at the degradation of polymeric carbohydrates. Presently, on the basis of sequence similarity catalytic modules of these enzymes have been classified into 90 families. Representatives of a particular family display similar fold and catalytic mechanisms. However, within families distinctions occur with regard to enzymatic properties and type of activity against carbohydrate chains. Cellobiohydrolase CbhA from Clostridium thermocellum is a large seven-modular enzyme with a catalytic module belonging to family 9. In contrast to other representatives of that family possessing only endo- and, in few cases, endo/exo-cellulase activities, CbhA is exclusively an exocellulase. The crystal structures of the combination of the immunoglobulin-like module and the catalytic module of CbhA (Ig-GH9_CbhA) and that of an inactive mutant Ig-GH9_CbhA(E795Q) in complex with cellotetraose (CTT) are reported here. The detailed analysis of these structures reveals that, while key catalytic residues and overall fold are conserved in this enzyme and those of other family 9 glycoside hydrolases, the active site of GH9_CbhA is blocked off after the -2 subsite. This feature which is created by an extension and altered conformation of a single loop region explains the inability of the active site of CbhA to accommodate a long cellulose chain and to cut it internally. This altered loop region is responsible for the exocellulolytic activity of the enzyme.

15642261	A structural pathway for signaling in the E46Q mutant of photoactive yellow protein.In the bacterial photoreceptor photoactive yellow protein (PYP), absorption of blue light by its chromophore leads to a conformational change in the protein associated with differential signaling activity, as it executes a reversible photocycle. Time-resolved Laue crystallography allows structural snapshots (as short as 150 ps) of high crystallographic resolution (approximately 1.6 A) to be taken of a protein as it functions. Here, we analyze by singular value decomposition a comprehensive time-resolved crystallographic data set of the E46Q mutant of PYP throughout the photocycle spanning 10 ns-100 ms. We identify and refine the structures of five distinct intermediates and provide a plausible chemical kinetic mechanism for their inter conversion. A clear structural progression is visible in these intermediates, in which a signal generated at the chromophore propagates through a distinct structural pathway of conserved residues and results in structural changes near the N terminus, over 20 A distant from the chromophore.

11320302	Structures of three diphtheria toxin repressor (DtxR) variants with decreased repressor activity.The diphtheria toxin repressor (DtxR) from Corynebacterium diphtheriae regulates the expression of the gene on corynebacteriophages that encodes diphtheria toxin (DT). Other genes regulated by DtxR include those that encode proteins involved in siderophore-mediated iron uptake. DtxR requires activation by divalent metals and holo-DtxR is a dimeric regulator with two distinct metal-binding sites per three-domain monomer. At site 1, three side chains and a sulfate or phosphate anion are involved in metal coordination. In the DtxR-DNA complex this anion is replaced by the side chain of Glu170 provided by the third domain of the repressor. At site 2 the metal ion is coordinated exclusively by constituents of the polypeptide chain. In this paper, five crystal structures of three DtxR variants focusing on residues Glu20, Arg80 and Cys102 are reported. The resolution of these structures ranges from 2.3 to 2.8 A. The side chain of Glu20 provided by the DNA-binding domain forms a salt bridge to Arg80, which in turn interacts with the anion. Replacing either of the salt-bridge partners with an alanine reduces repressor activity substantially and it has been inferred that the salt bridge could possibly control the wedge angle between the DNA-binding domain and the dimerization domain, thereby modulating repressor activity. Cys102 is a key residue of metal site 2 and its substitution into a serine abolishes repressor activity. The crystal structures of Zn-Glu20Ala-DtxR, Zn-Arg80Ala-DtxR, Cd-Cys102Ser-DtxR and apo-Cys102Ser-DtxR in two related space groups reveal that none of these substitutions leads to dramatic rearrangements of the DtxR fold. However, the five crystal structures presented here show significant local changes and a considerable degree of flexibility of the DNA-binding domain with respect to the dimerization domain. Furthermore, all five structures deviate significantly from the structure in the DtxR-DNA complex with respect to overall domain orientation. These results confirm the importance of the hinge motion for repressor activity. Since the third domain has often been invisible in previous crystal structures of DtxR, it is also noteworthy that the SH3-like domain could be traced in four of the five crystal structures.

7703848	Kinetics and crystal structure of a mutant Escherichia coli alkaline phosphatase (Asp-369-->Asn): a mechanism involving one zinc per active site.Using site-directed mutagenesis, an aspartate side chain involved in binding metal ions in the active site of Escherichia coli alkaline phosphatase (Asp-369) was replaced, alternately, by asparagine (D369N) and by alanine (D369A). The purified mutant enzymes showed reduced turnover rates (kcat) and increased Michaelis constants (Km). The kcat for the D369A enzyme was 5,000-fold lower than the value for the wild-type enzyme. The D369N enzyme required Zn2+ in millimolar concentrations to become fully active; even under these conditions the kcat measured for hydrolysis of p-nitrophenol phosphate was 2 orders of magnitude lower than for the wild-type enzyme. Thus the kcat/Km ratios showed that catalysis is 50 times less efficient when the carboxylate side chain of Asp-369 is replaced by the corresponding amide; and activity is reduced to near nonenzymic levels when the carboxylate is replaced by a methyl group. The crystal structure of D369N, solved to 2.5 A resolution with an R-factor of 0.189, showed vacancies at 2 of the 3 metal binding sites. On the basis of the kinetic results and the refined X-ray coordinates, a reaction mechanism is proposed for phosphate ester hydrolysis by the D369N enzyme involving only 1 metal with the possible assistance of a histidine side chain.

16083884	Crystal structure of a mutant elongation factor G trapped with a GTP analogue.Elongation factor G (EF-G) is a G protein factor that catalyzes the translocation step in protein synthesis on the ribosome. Its GTP conformation in the absence of the ribosome is currently unknown. We present the structure of a mutant EF-G (T84A) in complex with the non-hydrolysable GTP analogue GDPNP. The crystal structure provides a first insight into conformational changes induced in EF-G by GTP. Comparison of this structure with that of EF-G in complex with GDP suggests that the GTP and GDP conformations in solution are very similar and that the major contribution to the active GTPase conformation, which is quite different, therefore comes from its interaction with the ribosome.

9271499	Molecular structures of the S124A, S124T, and S124V site-directed mutants of UDP-galactose 4-epimerase from Escherichia coli.UDP-galactose 4-epimerase plays a critical role in sugar metabolism by catalyzing the interconversion of UDP-galactose and UDP-glucose. Originally, it was assumed that the enzyme contained a "traditional" catalytic base that served to abstract a proton from the 4'-hydroxyl group of the UDP-glucose or UDP-galactose substrates during the course of the reaction. However, recent high-resolution X-ray crystallographic analyses of the protein from Escherichia coli have demonstrated the lack of an aspartate, a glutamate, or a histidine residue properly oriented within the active site cleft for serving such a functional role. Rather, the X-ray crystallographic investigation of the epimerase.NADH.UDP-glucose abortive complex from this laboratory has shown that both Ser 124 and Tyr 149 are located within hydrogen bonding distance to the 4'- and 3'-hydroxyl groups of the sugar, respectively. To test the structural role of Ser 124 in the reaction mechanism of epimerase, three site-directed mutant proteins, namely S124A, S124T, and S124V, were constructed and crystals of the S124A.NADH.UDP, S124A.NADH.UDP-glucose, S124T. NADH.UDP-glucose, and S124V.NADH.UDP-glucose complexes were grown. All of the crystals employed in this investigation belonged to the space group P3221 with the following unit cell dimensions: a = b = 83.8 A, c = 108.4 A, and one subunit per asymmetric unit. X-ray data sets were collected to at least 2.15 A resolution, and each protein model was subsequently refined to an R value of lower than 19.0% for all measured X-ray data. The investigations described here demonstrate that the decreases in enzymatic activities observed for these mutant proteins are due to the loss of a properly positioned hydroxyl group at position 124 and not to major tertiary and quaternary structural perturbations. In addition, these structures demonstrate the importance of a hydroxyl group at position 124 in stabilizing the anti conformation of the nicotinamide ring as observed in the previous structural analysis of the epimerase.NADH. UDP complex.

9692955	Cryocrystallography and microspectrophotometry of a mutant (alpha D60N) tryptophan synthase alpha 2 beta 2 complex reveals allosteric roles of alpha Asp60.We have investigated the role of Asp60 of the alpha-subunit in allosteric communication between the tryptophan synthase alpha- and beta-subunits. Crystallographic and microspectrophotometric studies have been carried out on a mutant (alpha D60N) tryptophan synthase alpha 2 beta 2 complex which has no observable alpha-activity, but has substantial beta-activity. Single-crystal polarized absorption spectra indicate that the external aldimine is the predominant L-serine intermediate and that the amount of the intermediate formed is independent of pH, monovalent cations, and allosteric effectors. The three-dimensional structure is reported for this mutant enzyme complexed with indole 3-propanol phosphate bound to the alpha-site and L-serine bound to the beta-site (alpha D60N-IPP-Ser), and this structure is compared with that of the unliganded mutant enzyme (alpha D60N). In the complex, L-serine forms a stable external aldimine with the pyridoxal phosphate coenzyme at the active site of the beta-subunit. The conformation of the unliganded mutant is almost identical to that of the wild type enzyme. However, the structure of the mutant complexed with IPP and serine exhibits ligand-induced conformational changes much smaller than those observed previously for another mutant enzyme in the presence of the same ligands (beta K87T-IPP-Ser) [Rhee, S., Parris, K. D., Hyde, C. C., Ahmed, S. A., Miles, E. W., and Davies, D. R. (1997) Biochemistry 36, 7664-7680]. The alpha D60N-IPP-Ser alpha 2 beta 2 complex does not undergo the following ligand-induced conformational changes: (1) the closure of the alpha-subunit loop 6 (residues 178-191), (2) the movement of the mobile subdomain (residues 93-189) of the beta-subunit, and (3) the rotation of the alpha-subunit relative to the beta-subunit. These observations show that alpha Asp60 plays important roles in the closure of loop 6 and in allosteric communication between the alpha- and beta-subunits.

12374866	Expanding pyrimidine diphosphosugar libraries via structure-based nucleotidylyltransferase engineering.In vitro "glycorandomization" is a chemoenzymatic approach for generating diverse libraries of glycosylated biomolecules based on natural product scaffolds. This technology makes use of engineered variants of specific enzymes affecting metabolite glycosylation, particularly nucleotidylyltransferases and glycosyltransferases. To expand the repertoire of UDP/dTDP sugars readily available for glycorandomization, we now report a structure-based engineering approach to increase the diversity of alpha-d-hexopyranosyl phosphates accepted by Salmonella enterica LT2 alpha-d-glucopyranosyl phosphate thymidylyltransferase (E(p)). This article highlights the design rationale, determined substrate specificity, and structural elucidation of three "designed" mutations, illustrating both the success and unexpected outcomes from this type of approach. In addition, a single amino acid substitution in the substrate-binding pocket (L89T) was found to significantly increase the set of alpha-d-hexopyranosyl phosphates accepted by E(p) to include alpha-d-allo-, alpha-d-altro-, and alpha-d-talopyranosyl phosphate. In aggregate, our results provide valuable blueprints for altering nucleotidylyltransferase specificity by design, which is the first step toward in vitro glycorandomization.

15522303	Dissecting and designing inhibitor selectivity determinants at the S1 site using an artificial Ala190 protease (Ala190 uPA).A site-directed mutant of the serine protease urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA), was produced to assess the contribution of the Ser190 side-chain to the affinity and selectivity of lead uPA inhibitors in the absence of other differences present in comparisons of natural proteases. Crystallography and enzymology involving WT and Ala190 uPA were used to calculate free energy binding contributions of hydrogen bonds involving the Ser190 hydroxyl group (O(gamma)(Ser190)) responsible for the remarkable selectivity of 6-halo-5-amidinoindole and 6-halo-5-amidinobenzimidazole inhibitors toward uPA and against natural Ala190 protease anti-targets. Crystal structures of uPA complexes of novel, active site-directed arylguanidine and 2-aminobenzimidazole inhibitors of WT uPA, together with associated K(i) values for WT and Ala190 uPA, also indicate a significant role of Ser190 in the binding of these classes of uPA inhibitors. Structures and associated K(i) values for a lead inhibitor (CA-11) bound to uPA and to five other proteases, as well as for other leads bound to multiple proteases, help reveal the features responsible for the potency (K(i)=11nM) and selectivity of the remarkably small inhibitor, CA-11. The 6-fluoro-5-amidinobenzimidzole, CA-11, is more than 1000-fold selective against natural Ala190 protease anti-targets, and more than 100-fold selective against other Ser190 anti-targets.

12065398	Structural basis for the interaction between NTF2 and nucleoporin FxFG repeats.Interactions with nucleoporins containing FxFG-repeat cores are crucial for the nuclear import of RanGDP mediated by nuclear transport factor 2 (NTF2). We describe here the 1.9 A resolution crystal structure of yeast NTF2-N77Y bound to a FxFG-nucleoporin core, which provides a basis for understanding this interaction and its role in nuclear trafficking. The two identical FxFG binding sites on the dimeric molecule are formed by residues from each chain of NTF2. Engineered mutants at the interaction interface reduce the binding of NTF2 to nuclear pores and cause reduced growth rates and Ran mislocalization when substituted for the wild-type protein in yeast. Comparison with the crystal structure of FG-nucleoporin cores bound to importin-beta and TAP/p15 identified a number of common features of their binding sites. The structure of the binding interfaces on these transport factors provides a rationale for the specificity of their interactions with nucleoporins that, combined with their weak binding constants, facilitates rapid translocation through NPCs during nuclear trafficking.

11031266	Structures of prolyl oligopeptidase substrate/inhibitor complexes. Use of inhibitor binding for titration of the catalytic histidine residue.Structure determination of the inactive S554A variant of prolyl oligopeptidase complexed with an octapeptide has shown that substrate binding is restricted to the P4-P2' region. In addition, it has revealed a hydrogen bond network of potential catalytic importance not detected in other serine peptidases. This involves a unique intramolecular hydrogen bond between the P1' amide and P2 carbonyl groups and another between the P2' amide and Nepsilon2 of the catalytic histidine 680 residue. It is argued that both hydrogen bonds promote proton transfer from the imidazolium ion to the leaving group. Another complex formed with the product-like inhibitor benzyloxycarbonyl-glycyl-proline, indicating that the carboxyl group of the inhibitor forms a hydrogen bond with the Nepsilon2 of His(680). Because a protonated histidine makes a stronger interaction with the carboxyl group, it offers a possibility of the determination of the real pK(a) of the catalytic histidine residue. This was found to be 6.25, lower than that of the well studied serine proteases. The new titration method gave a single pK(a) for prolyl oligopeptidase, whose reaction exhibited a complex pH dependence for k(cat)/K(m), and indicated that the observed pK(a) values are apparent. The procedure presented may be applicable for other serine peptidases.

10841779	Catalytic cysteine of thymidylate synthase is activated upon substrate binding.The role of Ser 167 of Escherichia coli thymidylate synthase (TS) in catalysis has been characterized by kinetic and crystallographic studies. Position 167 variants including S167A, S167N, S167D, S167C, S167G, S167L, S167T, and S167V were generated by site-directed mutagenesis. Only S167A, S167G, S167T, and S167C complemented the growth of thymidine auxotrophs of E. coli in medium lacking thymidine. Steady-state kinetic analysis revealed that mutant enzymes exhibited k(cat) values 1.1-95-fold lower than that of the wild-type enzyme. Relative to wild-type TS, K(m) values of the mutant enzymes for 2'-deoxyuridylate (dUMP) were 5-90 times higher, while K(m) values for 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate (CH(2)H(4)folate) were 1.5-16-fold higher. The rate of dehalogenation of 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine 5'-monophosphate (BrdUMP), a reaction catalyzed by TS that does not require CH(2)H(4)folate as cosubstrate, by mutant TSs was analyzed and showed that only S167A and S167G catalyzed the dehalogenation reaction and values of k(cat)/K(m) for the mutant enzymes were decreased by 10- and 3000-fold, respectively. Analysis of pre-steady-state kinetics of ternary complex formation revealed that the productive binding of CH(2)H(4)folate is weaker to mutant TSs than to the wild-type enzyme. Chemical transformation constants (k(chem)) for the mutant enzymes were lower by 1.1-6.0-fold relative to the wild-type enzyme. S167A, S167T, and S167C crystallized in the I2(1)3 space group and scattered X-rays to either 1.7 A (S167A and S167T) or 2.6 A (S167C). The high-resolution data sets were refined to a R(crys) of 19.9%. In the crystals some cysteine residues were derivatized with 2-mercaptoethanol to form S,S-(2-hydroxyethyl)thiocysteine. The pattern of derivatization indicates that in the absence of bound substrate the catalytic cysteine is not more reactive than other cysteines. It is proposed that the catalytic cysteine is activated by substrate binding by a proton-transfer mechanism in which the phosphate group of the nucleotide neutralizes the charge of Arg 126', facilitating the transfer of a proton from the catalytic cysteine to a His 207-Asp 205 diad via a system of ordered water molecules.

12554939	Use of multiple anomalous dispersion to phase highly merohedrally twinned crystals of interleukin-1beta.The crystal structure at 1.54 A resolution of a double mutant of interleukin-1beta (F42W/W120F), a cytokine secreted by macrophages, was determined by multiple-wavelength anomalous dispersion (MAD) using data from highly twinned selenomethionine-modified crystals. The space group is P4(3), with unit-cell parameters a = b = 53.9, c = 77.4 A. Self-rotation function analysis and various intensity statistics revealed the presence of merohedral twinning in crystals of both the native (twinning fraction alpha approximately 0.35) and SeMet (alpha approximately 0.40) forms. Structure determination and refinement are discussed with emphasis on the possible reasons for successful phasing using untreated twinned MAD data.

12351824	Structural analysis of the two horseradish peroxidase catalytic residue variants H42E and R38S/H42E: implications for the catalytic cycle.The crystal structures of horseradish peroxidase C (HRPC) active-site mutants H42E and R38S/H42E co-crystallized with benzhydroxamic acid (BHA) and ferulic acid (FA), respectively, have been solved. The 2.5 A crystal structure of the H42E-BHA complex reveals that the side-chain O atoms of Glu42 occupy positions that are very similar to the positions of the two side-chain N atoms of the distal histidine in the wild-type HRPC-BHA structure. The mutation disturbs the hydrogen-bonding network extending from residue 42 to the distal calcium ion and results in the absence of the water molecule that is usually ligated to this ion in plant peroxidases. Consequently, the distal calcium ion is six- rather than seven-coordinated. In the 2.0 A R38S/H42E structure the position of Glu42 is different and no FA is observed in the distal haem pocket. This is a consequence of the absence of the Arg38 side chain, which limits the flexibility of the Glu42 side chain and modulates its acidity, making it unsuitable as a general acid-base catalyst in the reaction cycle. The water ligated to the distal calcium ion is present, showing that the wild-type distal hydrogen-bonding network is preserved. These results show why a glutamic acid residue can substitute for the conserved distal histidine in HRPC and that Arg38 plays a significant role in controlling the positioning and ionization state of the residue at position 42. Furthermore, these structures indicate that changes in the distal cavity are conveyed through the distal hydrogen-bonding network to the distal calcium site.

8069625	NMR analysis of the residual structure in the denatured state of an unusual mutant of staphylococcal nuclease.BACKGROUND: Staphylococcal nuclease is a well-developed model system for analyzing the effects of mutations on protein folding and stability. Substitution of glycine 88 with valine (Gly88Val) destabilizes staphylococcal nuclease by 1.0 kcal mole-1 and reduces its sensitivity to the denaturant guanidine hydrochloride, a phenomenon which may indicate an increase in residual structure in the denatured state. To assess its effects on denatured state structure, the Gly88Val mutation was incorporated into a 136 residue nonsense fragment which has been developed as a model of the wild type denatured state. RESULTS: Application of two- and three-dimensional NMR spectroscopy to the Gly88Val fragment uniformly labeled with 15N and 13C has led to the assignment of 93 of the 136 residues. Comparison of chemical shifts of backbone resonances to those of wild type native nuclease, analysis of the secondary shifts of the assigned resonances and nuclear Overhauser effects involving backbone protons indicate that, unlike the wild type fragment, most if not all of the five-stranded beta-barrel structure persists in this denatured state. CONCLUSION: One major effect of the Gly88Val mutation is to perturb the cooperative breakdown of the folded conformation, leading to a denatured state which is both more ordered and more stable than that formed by the wild type sequence. Since the equilibrium between the native and denatured states depends on the free energy difference between them, stabilization of the denatured state by the Gly88Val mutation indirectly destabilizes the native state.

11772019	Probing the role of the chloride ion in the mechanism of human pancreatic alpha-amylase.Human pancreatic alpha-amylase (HPA) is a member of the alpha-amylase family involved in the degradation of starch. Some members of this family, including HPA, require chloride for maximal activity. To determine the mechanism of chloride activation, a series of mutants (R195A, R195Q, N298S, R337A, and R337Q) were made in which residues in the chloride ion binding site were replaced. Mutations in this binding site were found to severely affect the ability of HPA to bind chloride ions with no binding detected for the R195 and R337 mutant enzymes. X-ray crystallographic analysis revealed that these mutations did not result in significant structural changes. However, the introduction of these mutations did alter the kinetic properties of the enzyme. Mutations to residue R195 resulted in a 20-450-fold decrease in the activity of the enzyme toward starch and shifted the pH optimum to a more basic pH. Interestingly, replacement of R337 with a nonbasic amino acid resulted in an alpha-amylase that no longer required chloride for catalysis and has a pH profile similar to that of wild-type HPA. In contrast, a mutation at residue N298 resulted in an enzyme that had much lower binding affinity for chloride but still required chloride for maximal activity. We propose that the chloride is required to increase the pK(a) of the acid/base catalyst, E233, which would otherwise be lower due to the presence of R337, a positively charged residue.

2059620	Redox enzyme engineering: conversion of human glutathione reductase into a trypanothione reductase.The substrate specificity of the human enzyme glutathione reductase was changed from its natural substrate glutathione to trypanothione [N1,N8-bis(glutathionyl)spermidine] by site-directed mutagenesis of two residues. The glutathione analogue, trypanothione, is the natural substrate for trypanothione reductase, an enzyme found in trypanosomatids and leishmanias, the causative agents of diseases such as African sleeping sickness, Chagas disease, and Oriental sore. The rational bases for our mutational experiments were the availability of a high-resolution X-ray structure for human glutathione reductase with bound substrates, the active site sequence comparisons of human glutathione reductase and the trypanothione reductases from Trypanosoma congolense and Trypanosoma cruzi, a complementary set of mutants in T. congolense trypanothione reductase, and the properties of substrate analogues of trypanothione. Mutation of two residues, A34----E34 and R37----W37, in the glutathione-binding site of human glutathione reductase switches human glutathione reductase into a trypanothione reductase with a preference for trypanothione over glutathione by a factor of 700 using kcat/Km as a criterion.

15897201	Structural insights into the mechanism of nuclease A, a betabeta alpha metal nuclease from Anabaena.Nuclease A (NucA) is a nonspecific endonuclease from Anabaena sp. capable of degrading single- and double-stranded DNA and RNA in the presence of divalent metal ions. We have determined the structure of the delta(2-24),D121A mutant of NucA in the presence of Zn2+ and Mn2+ (PDB code 1ZM8). The mutations were introduced to remove the N-terminal signal peptide and to reduce the activity of the nonspecific nuclease, thereby reducing its toxicity to the Escherichia coli expression system. NucA contains a betabeta alpha metal finger motif and a hydrated Mn2+ ion at the active site. Unexpectedly, NucA was found to contain additional metal binding sites approximately 26 A apart from the catalytic metal binding site. A structural comparison between NucA and the closest analog for which structural data exist, the Serratia nuclease, indicates several interesting differences. First, NucA is a monomer rather than a dimer. Second, there is an unexpected structural homology between the N-terminal segments despite a poorly conserved sequence, which in Serratia includes a cysteine bridge thought to play a regulatory role. In addition, although a sequence alignment had suggested that NucA lacks a proposed catalytic residue corresponding to Arg57 in Serratia, the structure determined here indicates that Arg93 in NucA is positioned to fulfill this role. Based on comparison with DNA-bound nuclease structures of the betabeta alpha metal finger nuclease family and available mutational data on NucA, we propose that His124 acts as a catalytic base, and Arg93 participates in the catalysis possibly through stabilization of the transition state.

1594573	Site-directed mutagenesis of pseudoazurin from Alcaligenes faecalis S-6; Pro80Ala mutant exhibits marked increase in reduction potential.Pseudoazurin (a blue copper protein or cupredoxin) of a denitrifying bacterium Alcaligenes faecalis S-6 is a direct electron carrier for a Cu-containing nitrite reductase (NIR) of the same organism. Site-directed mutagenesis of the pseudoazurin was carried out using an Escherichia coli expression system. Replacement of Tyr74 by Phe to remove an internal hydrogen bond in the beta-barrel caused a slight decrease in heat stability as well as a requirement for a higher concentration of Cu2+ for production in the E. coli host. Exchange of Ala for Pro80 adjacent to His81, one of the four ligands binding a type I Cu atom, caused a marked increase in reduction potential by 139 mV without change in the optical absorption spectrum. The ability of the pseudoazurin to transfer electrons to NIR was markedly diminished but the apparent Km of NIR for pseudoazurin was not affected by the mutation. X-ray diffraction data collected on the oxidized and reduced forms of the Pro80Ala mutant show that a water molecule occupies the pocket created by the absent side chain. This observation suggests that the increase in reduction potential may be caused due to the increased solvent accessibility to the Cu atom. The electron density difference maps on these structures (at 2.0 A) show that this water moves during the change in oxidation state, and that there are small, but localized, conformational changes greater than 6.5 A from the copper site, as well as movement of both the Cu2+ and the cysteinate sulfur.

3072018	The engineering of binding affinity at metal ion binding sites for the stabilization of proteins: subtilisin as a test case.A weak Ca2+ binding site in the bacterial serine protease subtilisin BPN' (EC 3.4.21.14) was chosen as a model to explore the feasibility of stabilizing a protein by increasing the binding affinity at a metal ion binding site. The existence of this weak Ca2+ binding site was first discovered through a study of the rate of thermal inactivation of wild-type subtilisin BPN' at 65 degrees C as a function of the free [Ca2+]. Increasing the [Ca2+] in the range 0.10-100 mM caused a 100-fold decrease in the rate of thermal inactivation. The data were found to closely fit a theoretical titration curve for a single Ca2+ specific binding site with an apparent log Ka = 1.49. A series of refined X-ray crystal structures (R less than or equal to 0.15, 1.7 A) of subtilisin in the presence of 0.0, 25.0, and 40.0 mM CaCl2 has allowed a detailed structural characterization of this Ca2+ binding site. Negatively charged side chains were introduced in the vicinity of the bound Ca2+ by changing Pro 172 and Gly 131 to Asp residues through site-directed and random mutagenesis techniques, respectively. These changes were found to increase the affinity of the Ca2+ binding site by 3.4- and 2-fold, respectively, when compared with the wild-type protein (ionic strength = 0.10). X-ray studies of these new variants of subtilisin revealed the carboxylate side chains to be 6.8 and 13.2 A, respectively, from the bound Ca2+. These distances and the degree of enhanced binding are consistent with simple electrostatic theory.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

16271889	Bovine mitochondrial peroxiredoxin III forms a two-ring catenane.A crystal structure is reported for the C168S mutant of a typical 2-Cys peroxiredoxin III (Prx III) from bovine mitochondria at a resolution of 3.3 A. Prx III is present as a two-ring catenane comprising two interlocking dodecameric toroids that are assembled from basic dimeric units. Each ring has an external diameter of 150 A and encompasses a central cavity that is 70 A in width. The concatenated dodecamers are inclined at an angle of 55 degrees, which provides a large contact surface between the rings. Dimer-dimer contacts involved in toroid formation are hydrophobic in nature, whereas the 12 areas of contact between interlocked rings arise from polar interactions. These two major modes of subunit interaction provide important insights into possible mechanisms of catenane formation.

10579814	Design of MKC-442 (emivirine) analogues with improved activity against drug-resistant HIV mutants.Two analogues of the nonnucleoside inhibitor of HIV-1 RT, MKC-442 (emivirine), containing different C6 substituents have been designed to be less susceptible to the commonly found drug-resistance mutation of Tyr181Cys. Compound TNK-6123 had a C6 thiocyclohexyl group designed to have more flexibility in adapting to the mutated drug-binding site. GCA-186 had additional 3',5'-dimethyl substituents aimed at forming close contacts with the conserved residue Trp229. Both compounds showed approximately 30-fold greater inhibitory effect than MKC-442 to the Tyr181Cys mutant virus as well as to the clinically important Lys103Asn virus. X-ray crystallographic structure determination of complexes with HIV-1 RT confirmed the predicted binding modes. These strategies might be used to improve the resilience of other NNRTI series against common drug-resistance mutations.

8987980	Elimination of the hydrolytic water molecule in a class A beta-lactamase mutant: crystal structure and kinetics.Two site-directed mutant enzymes of the class A beta-lactamase from Staphylococcus aureus PC1 were produced with the goal of blocking the site that in the native enzyme is occupied by the proposed hydrolytic water molecule. The crystal structures of these two mutant enzymes, N170Q and N170M, have been determined and refined at 2.2 and 2.0 A, respectively. They reveal that the side chain of Gln 170 displaces the water molecule, whereas that of Met170 does not. In both cases, the catalytic rates with benzylpenicillin are reduced by 10(4) compared with the native enzyme. With nitrocefin, the N170Q mutant enzyme exhibits an approximately 800-fold reduced rate compared with the native enzyme and in addition, a fast initial burst with stoichiometry of 1 mol of degraded nitrocefin/mol of enzyme. Stopped-flow kinetic experiments establish that the rate constant of the burst is 250 s-1, a value comparable with the rate of acylation of the native enzyme. Two structurally based mechanisms that explain the kinetic properties of the N170Q beta-lactamase are proposed, both invoking a deacylation-impaired enzyme due to the elimination of the hydrolytic water molecule. The catalytic rate of the N170M mutant enzyme with nitrocefin is reduced by approximately 50-fold compared with the native enzyme, and the slow progressive inhibition that is revealed indicates that the hydrolysis proceeds via a branched pathway mechanism. This is consistent with the structural data that show that the water site is preserved and that Met170 occupies part of the space that is required for substrate binding. The short contacts between the substrate and the enzyme may lead to structure perturbation and inactivation.

10653632	Dissection of malonyl-coenzyme A decarboxylation from polyketide formation in the reaction mechanism of a plant polyketide synthase.Chalcone synthase (CHS) catalyzes formation of the phenylpropanoid chalcone from one p-coumaroyl-CoA and three malonyl-coenzyme A (CoA) thioesters. The three-dimensional structure of CHS [Ferrer, J.-L., Jez, J. M., Bowman, M. E., Dixon, R. A., and Noel, J. P. (1999) Nat. Struct. Biol. 6, 775-784] suggests that four residues (Cys164, Phe215, His303, and Asn336) participate in the multiple decarboxylation and condensation reactions catalyzed by this enzyme. Here, we functionally characterize 16 point mutants of these residues for chalcone production, malonyl-CoA decarboxylation, and the ability to bind CoA and acetyl-CoA. Our results confirm Cys164's role as the active-site nucleophile in polyketide formation and elucidate the importance of His303 and Asn336 in the malonyl-CoA decarboxylation reaction. We suggest that Phe215 may help orient substrates at the active site during elongation of the polyketide intermediate. To better understand the structure-function relationships in some of these mutants, we also determined the crystal structures of the CHS C164A, H303Q, and N336A mutants refined to 1.69, 2.0, and 2.15 A resolution, respectively. The structure of the C164A mutant reveals that the proposed oxyanion hole formed by His303 and Asn336 remains undisturbed, allowing this mutant to catalyze malonyl-CoA decarboxylation without chalcone formation. The structures of the H303Q and N336A mutants support the importance of His303 and Asn336 in polarizing the thioester carbonyl of malonyl-CoA during the decarboxylation reaction. In addition, both of these residues may also participate in stabilizing the tetrahedral transition state during polyketide elongation. Conservation of the catalytic functions of the active-site residues may occur across a wide variety of condensing enzymes, including other polyketide and fatty acid synthases.

15994304	X-ray snapshots of peptide processing in mutants of tricorn-interacting factor F1 from Thermoplasma acidophilum.The tricorn-interacting factor F1 of the archaeon Thermoplasma acidophilum cleaves small hydrophobic peptide products of the proteasome and tricorn protease. F1 mutants of the active site residues that are involved in substrate recognition and catalysis displayed distinct activity patterns toward fluorogenic test substrates. Crystal structures of the mutant proteins complexed with peptides Phe-Leu, Pro-Pro, or Pro-Leu-Gly-Gly showed interaction of glutamates 213 and 245 with the N termini of the peptides and defined the S1 and S1' sites and the role of the catalytic residues. Evidence was found for processive peptide cleavage in the N-to-C direction, whereby the P1' product is translocated into the S1 site. A functional interaction of F1 with the tricorn protease was observed with the inactive F1 mutant G37A. Moreover, small angle x-ray scattering measurements for tricorn and inhibited F1 have been interpreted as formation of transient and substrate-induced complexes.

14581558	Structures of host range-controlling regions of the capsids of canine and feline parvoviruses and mutants.Canine parvovirus (CPV) and feline panleukopenia virus (FPV) differ in their ability to infect dogs and dog cells. Canine cell infection is a specific property of CPV and depends on the ability of the virus to bind the canine transferrin receptor (TfR), as well as other unidentified factors. Three regions in the capsid structure, located around VP2 residues 93, 300, and 323, can all influence canine TfR binding and canine cell infection. These regions were compared in the CPV and FPV capsid structures that have been determined, as well as in two new structures of CPV capsids that contain substitutions of the VP2 Asn-93 to Asp and Arg, respectively. The new structures, determined by X-ray crystallography to 3.2 and 3.3 A resolutions, respectively, clearly showed differences in the interactions of residue 93 with an adjacent loop on the capsid surface. Each of the three regions show small differences in structure, but each appears to be structurally independent of the others, and the changes likely act together to affect the ability of the capsid to bind the canine TfR and to infect canine cells. This emphasizes the complex nature of capsid alterations that change the virus-cell interaction to allow infection of cells from different hosts.

14699104	The structural GDP/GTP cycle of Rab11 reveals a novel interface involved in the dynamics of recycling endosomes.The small GTP-binding protein Rab11 is an essential regulator of the dynamics of recycling endosomes. Here we report the crystallographic analysis of the GDP/GTP cycle of human Rab11a, and a structure-based mutagenesis study that identifies a novel mutant phenotype. The crystal structures show that the nucleotide-sensitive switch 1 and 2 regions differ from those of other Rab proteins. In Rab11-GDP, they contribute to a close packed symmetrical dimer, which may associate to membranes in the cell and allow Rab11 to undergo GDP/GTP cycles without recycling to the cytosol. The structure of active Rab11 delineates a three-dimensional site that includes switch 1 and is separate from the site defined by the Rab3/Rabphilin interface. It is proposed to form a novel interface for a Rab11 partner compatible with the simultaneous binding of another partner at the Rabphilin interface. Mutation of Ser(29) to Phe in this epitope resulted in morphological modifications of the recycling compartment that are distinct from those induced by the classical dominant-negative and constitutively active Rab11 mutants. Recycling endosomes condensed in the perinuclear region where they retained recycling transferrin, and they clustered Rab11- and EEA1-positive membranes. Altogether, our study suggests that this mutation impairs a specific subset of Rab11 interactions, possibly those involved in cytoskeleton-based movements driving the slow recycling pathway.

7493956	Crystallographic studies of the interaction of cyclodextrin glycosyltransferase from Bacillus circulans strain 251 with natural substrates and products.Asp-229, Glu-257, and Asp-328 constitute the catalytic residues in cyclodextrin glycosyl transferase from Bacillus circulans strain 251. Via site-directed mutagenesis constructed D229N, E257Q, and D328N mutant proteins showed a 4,000-60,000-fold reduction of cyclization activity. A D229N/E257Q double mutant showed a 700,000-fold reduction and was crystallized for use in soaking experiments with alpha-cyclodextrin. Crystal structures were determined of wild type CGTase soaked at elevated pH with alpha-cyclodextrin (resolution, 2.1 A) and maltoheptaose (2.4 A). In addition, structures at cryogenic temperature were solved of the unliganded enzyme (2.2 A) and of the D229N/E257Q mutant after soaking with alpha-cyclodextrin (2.6 A). In the crystals soaked in alpha-cyclodextrin and maltoheptaose, a maltotetraose molecule is observed to bind in the active site. Residue 229 is at hydrogen bonding distance from the C-6 hydroxyl group of the sugar, which after cleavage will contain the new reducing end. In the D229N/E257Q double mutant structure, two alpha-cyclodextrins are observed to replace two maltoses at the E-domain, thus providing structural information on product inhibition via binding to the enzyme's raw starch binding domain.

11371559	Mutations in the G-domain of elongation factor G from Thermus thermophilus affect both its interaction with GTP and fusidic acid.Two hypersensitive and two resistant variants of elongation factor-G (EF-G) toward fusidic acid are studied in comparison with the wild type factor. All mutated proteins are active in a cell-free translation system and ribosome-dependent GTP hydrolysis. The EF-G variants with the Thr-84-->Ala or Asp-109-->Lys mutations bring about a strong resistance of EF-G to the antibiotic, whereas the EF-Gs with substitutions Gly-16-->Val or Glu-119-->Lys are the first examples of fusidic acid-hypersensitive factors. A correlation between fusidic acid resistance of EF-G mutants and their affinity to GTP are revealed in this study, although their interactions with GDP are not changed. Thus, fusidic acid-hypersensitive mutants have the high affinity to an uncleavable GTP analog, but the association of resistant mutants with GTP is decreased. The effects of either fusidic acid-sensitive or resistant mutations can be explained by the conformational changes in the EF-G molecule, which influence its GTP-binding center. The results presented in this paper indicate that fusidic acid-sensitive mutant factors have a conformation favorable for GTP binding and subsequent interaction with the ribosomes.

11148047	Amino acid residues in ribonuclease MC1 from bitter gourd seeds which are essential for uridine specificity.The ribonuclease MC1 (RNase MC1), isolated from seeds of bitter gourd (Momordica charantia), consists of 190 amino acids and is characterized by specific cleavage at the 5'-side of uridine. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to evaluate the contribution of four amino acids, Asn71, Val72, Leu73, and Arg74, at the alpha4-alpha5 loop between alpha4 and alpha5 helices for recognition of uracil base by RNase MC1. Four mutants, N71T, V72L, L73A, and R74S, in which Asn71, Val72, Leu73, and Arg74 in RNase MC1 were substituted for the corresponding amino acids, Thr, Leu, Ala, and Ser, respectively, in a guanylic acid preferential RNase NW from Nicotiana glutinosa, were prepared and characterized with respect to enzymatic activity. Kinetic analysis with a dinucleoside monophosphate, CpU, showed that the mutant N71T exhibited 7.0-fold increased K(m) and 2.3-fold decreased k(cat), while the mutant L73A had 14.4-fold increased K(m), although it did retain the k(cat) value comparable to that of the wild-type. In contrast, replacements of Val72 and Arg74 by the corresponding amino acids Leu and Ser, respectively, had little effect on the enzymatic activity. This observation is consistent with findings in the crystal structure analysis that Asn71 and Leu73 are responsible for a uridine specificity for RNase MC1. The role of Asn71 in enzymatic reaction of RNase MC1 was further investigated by substituting amino acids Ala, Ser, Gln, and Asp. Our observations suggest that Asn71 has at least two roles: one is base recognition by hydrogen bonding, and the other is to stabilize the conformation of the alpha4-alpha5 loop by hydrogen bonding to the peptide backbone, events which possibly result in an appropriate orientation of the alpha-helix (alpha5) containing active site residues. Mutants N71T and N71S showed a remarkable shift from uracil to guanine specificity, as evaluated by cleavage of CpG, although they did exhibit uridine specificity against yeast RNA and homopolynucleotides.

15252033	The anticoagulant thrombin mutant W215A/E217A has a collapsed primary specificity pocket.The thrombin mutant W215A/E217A features a drastically impaired catalytic activity toward chromogenic and natural substrates but efficiently activates the anticoagulant protein C in the presence of thrombomodulin. As the remarkable anticoagulant properties of this mutant continue to be unraveled in preclinical studies, we solved the x-ray crystal structures of its free form and its complex with the active site inhibitor H-d-Phe-Pro-Arg-CH(2)Cl (PPACK). The PPACK-bound structure of W215A/E217A is identical to the structure of the PPACK-bound slow form of thrombin. On the other hand, the structure of the free form reveals a collapse of the 215-217 strand that crushes the primary specificity pocket. The collapse results from abrogation of the stacking interaction between Phe-227 and Trp-215 and the polar interactions of Glu-217 with Thr-172 and Lys-224. Other notable changes are a rotation of the carboxylate group of Asp-189, breakage of the H-bond between the catalytic residues Ser-195 and His-57, breakage of the ion pair between Asp-222 and Arg-187, and significant disorder in the 186- and 220-loops that define the Na(+) site. These findings explain the impaired catalytic activity of W215A/E217A and demonstrate that the analysis of the molecular basis of substrate recognition by thrombin and other proteases requires crystallization of both the free and bound forms of the enzyme.

10194345	Crystal structure determination of cholesterol oxidase from Streptomyces and structural characterization of key active site mutants.Cholesterol oxidase is a monomeric flavoenzyme which catalyzes the oxidation and isomerization of cholesterol to cholest-4-en-3-one. The enzyme interacts with lipid bilayers in order to bind its steroid substrate. The X-ray structure of the enzyme from Brevibacterium sterolicum revealed two loops, comprising residues 78-87 and residues 433-436, which act as a lid over the active site and facilitate binding of the substrate [Vrielink et al. (1991) J. Mol. Biol. 219, 533-554; Li et al. (1993) Biochemistry 32, 11507-11515]. It was postulated that these loops must open, forming a hydrophobic channel between the membrane and the active site of the protein and thus sequestering the cholesterol substrate from the aqueous environment. Here we describe the three-dimensional structure of the homologous enzyme from Streptomyces refined to 1.5 A resolution. Structural comparisons to the enzyme from B. sterolicum reveal significant conformational differences in these loop regions; in particular, a region of the loop comprising residues 78-87 adopts a small amphipathic helical turn with hydrophobic residues directed toward the active site cavity and hydrophilic residues directed toward the external surface of the molecule. It seems reasonable that this increased rigidity reduces the entropy loss that occurs upon binding substrate. Consequently, the Streptomyces enzyme is a more efficient catalyst. In addition, we have determined the structures of three active site mutants which have significantly reduced activity for either the oxidation (His447Asn and His447Gln) or the isomerization (Glu361Gln). Our structural and kinetic data indicate that His447 and Glu361 act as general base catalysts in association with conserved water H2O541 and Asn485. The His447, Glu361, H2O541, and Asn485 hydrogen bond network is conserved among other oxidoreductases. This catalytic tetrad appears to be a structural motif that occurs in flavoenzymes that catalyze the oxidation of unactivated alcohols.

9571026	Structural and functional analysis of the 1:1 growth hormone:receptor complex reveals the molecular basis for receptor affinity.The designed G120R mutant of human growth hormone (hGH) is an antagonist and can bind only one molecule of the growth hormone receptor. We have determined the crystal structure of the 1:1 complex between this mutant and the receptor extracellular domain (hGHbp) at 2.6 A resolution, and used it to guide a detailed survey of the structural and functional basis for hormone-receptor recognition. The overall structure of the complex is very similar to the equivalent portion of the 1:2 complex, showing that formation of the active complex does not involve major conformational changes. However, a segment involved in receptor-receptor interactions in the 1:2 complex is disordered in this structure, suggesting that its productive conformation is stabilized by receptor dimerization.The hormone binding site of the receptor comprises a central hydrophobic patch dominated by Trp104 and Trp169, surrounded by a hydrophilic periphery containing several well-ordered water molecules. Previous alanine scanning showed that the hydrophobic "hot spot" confers most of the binding energy. The new structural data, coupled with binding and kinetic analysis of further mutants, indicate that the hot spot is assembled cooperatively and that many residues contribute indirectly to binding. Several hydrophobic residues serve to orient the key tryptophan residues; kinetic analysis suggests that Pro106 locks the Trp104 main-chain into a required conformation. The electrostatic contacts of Arg43 to hGH are less important than the intramolecular packing of its alkyl chain with Trp169. The true functional epitope that directly contributes binding energy may therefore comprise as few as six side-chains, participating mostly in alkyl-aromatic stacking interactions. Outside the functional epitope, multiple mutation of residues to alanine resulted in non-additive increases in affinity: up to tenfold for a hepta-alanine mutant. Contacts in the epitope periphery can therefore attenuate the affinity of the central hot spot, perhaps reflecting a role in conferring specificity to the interaction.

15449941	Engineering of the pH optimum of Bacillus cereus beta-amylase: conversion of the pH optimum from a bacterial type to a higher-plant type.The optimum pH of Bacillus cereus beta-amylase (BCB, pH 6.7) differs from that of soybean beta-amylase (SBA, pH 5.4) due to the substitution of a few amino acid residues near the catalytic base residue (Glu 380 in SBA and Glu 367 in BCB). To explore the mechanism for controlling the optimum pH of beta-amylase, five mutants of BCB (Y164E, Y164F, Y164H, Y164Q, and Y164Q/T47M/Y164E/T328N) were constructed and characterized with respect to enzymatic properties and X-ray structural crystal analysis. The optimum pH of the four single mutants shifted to 4.2-4.8, approximately 2 pH units and approximately 1 pH unit lower than those of BCB and SBA, respectively, and their k(cat) values decreased to 41-3% of that of the wild-type enzyme. The X-ray crystal analysis of the enzyme-maltose complexes showed that Glu 367 of the wild type is surrounded by two water molecules (W1 and W2) that are not found in SBA. W1 is hydrogen-bonded to both side chains of Glu 367 and Tyr 164. The mutation of Tyr 164 to Glu and Phe resulted in the disruption of the hydrogen bond between Tyr 164 Oeta and W1 and the introduction of two additional water molecules near position 164. In contrast, the triple mutant of BCB with a slightly decreased pH optimum at pH 6.0 has no water molecules (W1 and W2) around Glu 367. These results suggested that a water-mediated hydrogen bond network (Glu 367...W1...Tyr 164...Thr 328) is the primary requisite for the increased pH optimum of wild-type BCB. This strategy is completely different from that of SBA, in which a hydrogen bond network (Glu 380...Thr 340...Glu 178) reduces the optimum pH in a hydrophobic environment.

12963370	ALS mutants of human superoxide dismutase form fibrous aggregates via framework destabilization.Many point mutations in human Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD) cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS), a fatal neurodegenerative disorder in heterozygotes. Here we show that these mutations cluster in protein regions influencing architectural integrity. Furthermore, crystal structures of SOD wild-type and FALS mutant H43R proteins uncover resulting local framework defects. Characterizations of beta-barrel (H43R) and dimer interface (A4V) FALS mutants reveal reduced stability and drastically increased aggregation propensity. Moreover, electron and atomic force microscopy indicate that these defects promote the formation of filamentous aggregates. The filaments resemble those seen in neurons of FALS patients and bind both Congo red and thioflavin T, suggesting the presence of amyloid-like, stacked beta-sheet interactions. These results support free-cysteine-independent aggregation of FALS mutant SOD as an integral part of FALS pathology. They furthermore provide a molecular basis for the single FALS disease phenotype resulting from mutations of diverse side-chains throughout the protein: many FALS mutations reduce structural integrity, lowering the energy barrier for fibrous aggregation.

15196010	A molecular ruler for chain elongation catalyzed by octaprenyl pyrophosphate synthase and its structure-based engineering to produce unprecedented long chain trans-prenyl products.Octaprenyl pyrophosphate synthase (OPPs) catalyzes consecutive condensation reactions of farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP) with five molecules of isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) to generate C(40) octaprenyl pyrophosphate (OPP) which constitutes the side chain of menaquinone. We have previously reported the X-ray structure of OPPs from Thermotoga maritima, which is composed entirely of alpha-helices joined by connecting loops and is arranged with nine core helices around a large central cavity [Guo, R. T., Kuo, C. J., Ko, T. P., Chou, C. C., Shr, R. L., Liang, P. H., and Wang, A. H.-J. (2004) J. Biol. Chem. 279, 4903-4912]. A76 and S77 are located on top of the active site close to where FPP is bound. A76Y and A76Y/S77F OPPs mutants produce C(20), indicating that the substituted larger residues interfere with the substrate chain elongation. Surprisingly, the A76Y/S77F mutant synthesizes a larger amount of C(20) than the A76Y mutant. In the crystal structure of the A76Y/S77F mutant, F77 is pushed away by Y76, thereby creating more space between those two large amino acids to accommodate the C(20) product. A large F132 residue at the bottom of the tunnel-shaped active site serves as the "floor" and determines the final product chain length. The substitution of F132 with a small Ala, thereby removing the blockade, led to the synthesis of a C(50) product larger than that produced by the wild-type enzyme. On the basis of the structure, we have sequentially mutated the large amino acids, including F132, L128, I123, and D62, to Ala underneath the tunnel. The products of the F132A/L128A/I123A/D62A mutant reach C(95), beyond the largest chain length generated by all known trans-prenyltransferases. Further modifications of the enzyme reaction conditions, including new IPP derivatives, may allow the preparation of high-molecular weight polyprenyl products resembling the rubber molecule.

11320305	Ultrahigh-resolution structure of a BPTI mutant.The crystal structure of a mutant of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor has been refined to 0.86 A resolution using low-temperature synchrotron data. The variant contains three mutations in the binding loop (Thr11Ala, Pro13Ala, Lys15Arg) and an unrelated Met52Leu substitution. Refinement with anisotropic displacement parameters and with removal of main-chain stereochemical restraints converged with R = 0.1035. The use of full-matrix refinement provided an estimate of the variances in the derived parameters. Some stereochemical parameters, such as the planarity of the peptide group and the value of the N-C(alpha)-C angle, show a wide spread, suggesting that the standard values used as restraints in protein structure refinements may not always be entirely appropriate. Comparison with the recently determined room-temperature structure of the same mutant at 1.42 A resolution confirms the previous observations and provides new details, such as a double conformation of the main chain at Leu29 and at Gly56-Gly57, a high proportion (over 20%) of residues in double conformations, correlation of disorder through lattice contacts and the positions of H atoms, including those in water molecules, and their involvement in C-H...O and N-H...pi hydrogen bonds.

12711609	Characterization of a novel Ser-cisSer-Lys catalytic triad in comparison with the classical Ser-His-Asp triad.Amidase signature family enzymes, which are widespread in nature, contain a newly identified Ser-cisSer-Lys catalytic triad in which the peptide bond between Ser131 and the preceding residue Gly130 is in a cis configuration. In order to characterize the property of the novel triad, we have determined the structures of five mutant malonamidase E2 enzymes that contain a Cys-cisSer-Lys, Ser-cisAla-Lys, or Ser-cisSer-Ala triad or a substitution of Gly130 with alanine. Cysteine cannot replace the role of Ser155 due to a hyper-reactivity of the residue, which results in the modification of the cysteine to cysteinyl sulfinic acid, most likely inside the expression host cells. The lysine residue plays a structural as well as a catalytic role, since the substitution of the residue with alanine disrupts the active site structure completely. The two observations are in sharp contrast with the consequences of the corresponding substitutions in the classical Ser-His-Asp triad. Structural data on the mutant containing the Ser-cisAla-Lys triad convincingly suggest that Ser131 plays an analogous catalytic role as the histidine of the Ser-His-Asp triad. The unusual cis configuration of Ser131 appears essential for the precise contacts of this residue with the other triad residues, as indicated by the near invariance of the preceding glycine residue (Gly130), structural data on the G130A mutant, and by a modeling experiment. The data provide a deep understanding of the role of each residue of the new triad at the atomic level and demonstrate that the new triad is a catalytic device distinctively different from the classical triad or its variants.

11779231	Non-standard insulin design: structure-activity relationships at the periphery of the insulin receptor.The design of insulin analogues has emphasized stabilization or destabilization of structural elements according to established principles of protein folding. To this end, solvent-exposed side-chains extrinsic to the receptor-binding surface provide convenient sites of modification. An example is provided by an unfavorable helical C-cap (Thr(A8)) whose substitution by favorable amino acids (His(A8) or Arg(A8)) has yielded analogues of improved stability. Remarkably, these analogues also exhibit enhanced activity, suggesting that activity may correlate with stability. Here, we test this hypothesis by substitution of diaminobutyric acid (Dab(A8)), like threonine an amino acid of low helical propensity. The crystal structure of Dab(A8)-insulin is similar to those of native insulin and the related analogue Lys(A8)-insulin. Although no more stable than native insulin, the non-standard analogue is twice as active. Stability and affinity can therefore be uncoupled. To investigate alternative mechanisms by which A8 substitutions enhance activity, multiple substitutions were introduced. Surprisingly, diverse aliphatic, aromatic and polar side-chains enhance receptor binding and biological activity. Because no relationship is observed between activity and helical propensity, we propose that local interactions between the A8 side-chain and an edge of the hormone-receptor interface modulate affinity. Dab(A8)-insulin illustrates the utility of non-standard amino acids in hypothesis-driven protein design.

10080896	Protein mimicry of DNA from crystal structures of the uracil-DNA glycosylase inhibitor protein and its complex with Escherichia coli uracil-DNA glycosylase.Uracil-DNA glycosylase (UDG), which is a critical enzyme in DNA base-excision repair that recognizes and removes uracil from DNA, is specifically and irreversably inhibited by the thermostable uracil-DNA glycosylase inhibitor protein (Ugi). A paradox for the highly specific Ugi inhibition of UDG is how Ugi can successfully mimic DNA backbone interactions for UDG without resulting in significant cross-reactivity with numerous other enzymes that possess DNA backbone binding affinity. High-resolution X-ray crystal structures of Ugi both free and in complex with wild-type and the functionally defective His187Asp mutant Escherichia coli UDGs reveal the detailed molecular basis for duplex DNA backbone mimicry by Ugi. The overall shape and charge distribution of Ugi most closely resembles a midpoint in a trajectory between B-form DNA and the kinked DNA observed in UDG:DNA product complexes. Thus, Ugi targets the mechanism of uracil flipping by UDG and appears to be a transition-state mimic for UDG-flipping of uracil nucleotides from DNA. Essentially all the exquisite shape, electrostatic and hydrophobic complementarity for the high-affinity UDG-Ugi interaction is pre-existing, except for a key flip of the Ugi Gln19 carbonyl group and Glu20 side-chain, which is triggered by the formation of the complex. Conformational changes between unbound Ugi and Ugi complexed with UDG involve the beta-zipper structural motif, which we have named for the reversible pairing observed between intramolecular beta-strands. A similar beta-zipper is observed in the conversion between the open and closed forms of UDG. The combination of extremely high levels of pre-existing structural complementarity to DNA binding features specific to UDG with key local conformational changes in Ugi resolves the UDG-Ugi paradox and suggests a potentially general structural solution to the formation of very high affinity DNA enzyme-inhibitor complexes that avoid cross- reactivity.

14617621	A substrate-induced switch in the reaction mechanism of a thermophilic esterase: kinetic evidences and structural basis.The reaction mechanism of the esterase 2 (EST2) from Alicyclobacillus acidocaldarius was studied at the kinetic and structural level to shed light on the mechanism of activity and substrate specificity increase previously observed in its double mutant M211S/R215L. In particular, the values of kinetic constants (k1, k(-1), k2, and k3) along with activation energies (E1, E(-1), E2, and E3) were measured for wild type and mutant enzyme. The previously suggested substrate-induced switch in the reaction mechanism from kcat=k3 with a short acyl chain substrate (p-nitrophenyl hexanoate) to kcat=k2 with a long acyl chain substrate (p-nitrophenyl dodecanoate) was validated. The inhibition afforded by an irreversible inhibitor (1-hexadecanesulfonyl chloride), structurally related to p-nitrophenyl dodecanoate, was studied by kinetic analysis. Moreover the three-dimensional structure of the double mutant bound to this inhibitor was determined, providing essential information on the enzyme mechanism. In fact, structural analysis explained the observed substrate-induced switch because of an inversion in the binding mode of the long acyl chain derivatives with respect to the acyl- and alcohol-binding sites.

12215417	Structural basis for AMPA receptor activation and ligand selectivity: crystal structures of five agonist complexes with the GluR2 ligand-binding core.Glutamate is the principal excitatory neurotransmitter within the mammalian CNS, playing an important role in many different functions in the brain such as learning and memory. In this study, a combination of molecular biology, X-ray structure determinations, as well as electrophysiology and binding experiments, has been used to increase our knowledge concerning the ionotropic glutamate receptor GluR2 at the molecular level. Five high-resolution X-ray structures of the ligand-binding domain of GluR2 (S1S2J) complexed with the three agonists (S)-2-amino-3-[3-hydroxy-5-(2-methyl-2H-tetrazol-5-yl)isoxazol-4-yl]propionic acid (2-Me-Tet-AMPA), (S)-2-amino-3-(3-carboxy-5-methylisoxazol-4-yl)propionic acid (ACPA), and (S)-2-amino-3-(4-bromo-3-hydroxy-isoxazol-5-yl)propionic acid (Br-HIBO), as well as of a mutant thereof (S1S2J-Y702F) in complex with ACPA and Br-HIBO, have been determined. The structures reveal that AMPA agonists with an isoxazole moiety adopt different binding modes in the receptor, dependent on the substituents of the isoxazole. Br-HIBO displays selectivity among different AMPA receptor subunits, and the design and structure determination of the S1S2J-Y702F mutant in complex with Br-HIBO and ACPA have allowed us to explain the molecular mechanism behind this selectivity and to identify key residues for ligand recognition. The agonists induce the same degree of domain closure as AMPA, except for Br-HIBO, which shows a slightly lower degree of domain closure. An excellent correlation between domain closure and efficacy has been obtained from electrophysiology experiments undertaken on non-desensitising GluR2i(Q)-L483Y receptors expressed in oocytes, providing strong evidence that receptor activation occurs as a result of domain closure. The structural results, combined with the functional studies on the full-length receptor, form a powerful platform for the design of new selective agonists.

11207290	Structural and functional consequences of altering a peptide MHC anchor residue.To better understand TCR discrimination of multiple ligands, we have analyzed the crystal structures of two Hb peptide/I-E(k) complexes that differ by only a single amino acid substitution at the P6 anchor position within the peptide (E73D). Detailed comparison of multiple independently determined structures at 1.9 A resolution reveals that removal of a single buried methylene group can alter a critical portion of the TCR recognition surface. Significant variance was observed in the peptide P5-P8 main chain as well as a rotamer difference at LeuP8, approximately 10 A distal from the substitution. No significant variations were observed in the conformation of the two MHC class II molecules. The ligand alteration results in two peptide/MHC complexes that generate bulk T cell responses that are distinct and essentially nonoverlapping. For the Hb-specific T cell 3.L2, substitution reduces the potency of the ligand 1000-fold. Soluble 3.L2 TCR binds the two peptide/MHC complexes with similar affinity, although with faster kinetics. These results highlight the role of subtle variations in MHC Ag presentation on T cell activation and signaling.

11827517	X-ray crystal structures of D100E trichodiene synthase and its pyrophosphate complex reveal the basis for terpene product diversity.The 2.4 A resolution X-ray crystal structure of D100E trichodiene synthase and the 2.6 A resolution structure of its complex with inorganic pyrophosphate are reported. The D100E amino acid substitution in the so-called "aspartate-rich" motif does not result in large changes to the overall structure of the enzyme. In the pyrophosphate complex, however, pyrophosphate coordinates two Mg(2+) ions at the mouth of the active site without causing large changes in the structure of the enzyme. This contrasts with pyrophosphate binding in the wild-type enzyme, where pyrophosphate coordinates three Mg(2+) ions and triggers a significant conformational change that closes the mouth of the active site and optimizes packing density in the enzyme-substrate complex. The attenuation of active site closure in D100E trichodiene synthase compromises enzyme-substrate packing density and confers additional spatial and conformational degrees of freedom on the substrate and carbocation intermediates, which in turn results in the formation of five alternate sesquiterpene products in addition to trichodiene. By extension, then, the diversity of terpene cyclases in biology may have evolved in part by amino acid substitutions that fine-tune structural changes dependent on metal-diphosphate complexation that govern the formation of the active site template and enzyme-substrate packing density.
