11467966	Crystal structures of amylosucrase from Neisseria polysaccharea in complex with D-glucose and the active site mutant Glu328Gln in complex with the natural substrate sucrose.	The structure of amylosucrase from Neisseria polysaccharea in complex with beta-D-glucose has been determined by X-ray crystallography at a resolution of 1.66 A. Additionally, the structure of the inactive active site mutant Glu328Gln in complex with sucrose has been determined to a resolution of 2.0 A. The D-glucose complex shows two well-defined D-glucose molecules, one that binds very strongly in the bottom of a pocket that contains the proposed catalytic residues (at the subsite -1), in a nonstrained (4)C(1) conformation, and one that binds in the packing interface to a symmetry-related molecule. A third weaker D-glucose-binding site is located at the surface near the active site pocket entrance. The orientation of the D-glucose in the active site emphasizes the Glu328 role as the general acid/base. The binary sucrose complex shows one molecule bound in the active site, where the glucosyl moiety is located at the alpha-amylase -1 position and the fructosyl ring occupies subsite +1. Sucrose effectively blocks the only visible access channel to the active site. From analysis of the complex it appears that sucrose binding is primarily obtained through enzyme interactions with the glucosyl ring and that an important part of the enzyme function is a precise alignment of a lone pair of the linking O1 oxygen for hydrogen bond interaction with Glu328. The sucrose specificity appears to be determined primarily by residues Asp144, Asp394, Arg446, and Arg509. Both Asp394 and Arg446 are located in an insert connecting beta-strand 7 and alpha-helix 7 that is much longer in amylosucrase compared to other enzymes from the alpha-amylase family (family 13 of the glycoside hydrolases).

12056894	Organization of an efficient carbonic anhydrase: implications for the mechanism based on structure-function studies of a T199P/C206S mutant.	Substitution of Pro for Thr199 in the active site of human carbonic anhydrase II (HCA II)(1) reduces its catalytic efficiency about 3000-fold. X-ray crystallographic structures of the T199P/C206S variant have been determined in complex with the substrate bicarbonate and with the inhibitors thiocyanate and beta-mercaptoethanol. The latter molecule is normally not an inhibitor of wild-type HCA II. All three ligands display novel binding interactions to the T199P/C206S mutant. The beta-mercaptoethanol molecule binds in the active site area with its sulfur atom tetrahedrally coordinated to the zinc ion. Thiocyanate binds tetrahedrally coordinated to the zinc ion in T199P/C206S, in contrast to its pentacoordinated binding to the zinc ion in wild-type HCA II. Bicarbonate binds to the mutant with two of its oxygens at the positions of the zinc water (Wat263) and Wat318 in wild-type HCA II. The environment of this area is more hydrophilic than the normal bicarbonate-binding site of HCA II situated in the hydrophobic part of the cavity normally occupied by the so-called deep water (Wat338). The observation of a new binding site for bicarbonate has implications for understanding the mechanism by which the main-chain amino group of Thr199 acquired an important role for orientation of the substrate during the evolution of the enzyme.

8706862	A covalently bound catalytic intermediate in Escherichia coli asparaginase: crystal structure of a Thr-89-Val mutant.	Escherichia coli asparaginase II catalyzes the hydrolysis of L-asparagine to L-aspartate via a threonine-bound acyl-enzyme intermediate. A nearly inactive mutant in which one of the active site threonines, Thr-89, was replaced by valine was constructed, expressed, and crystallized. Its structure, solved at 2.2 A resolution, shows high overall similarity to the wild-type enzyme, but an aspartyl moiety is covalently bound to Thr-12, resembling a reaction intermediate. Kinetic analysis confirms the deacylation deficiency, which is also explained on a structural basis. The previously identified oxyanion hole is described in more detail.

12693929	NMR structure of a bifunctional rhodamine labeled N-domain of troponin C complexed with the regulatory "switch" peptide from troponin I: implications for in situ fluorescence studies in muscle fibers.	The structure of the calcium-saturated regulatory domain of skeletal troponin C (sNTnC) complexed with the switch peptide comprising residues 115-131 of troponin I (TnI), and with a bifunctional rhodamine fluorescent label attached to residues 56 (E56C) and 63 (E63C) on the C helix of sNTnC, has been determined using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. The structure shows that the integrity of the C helix is not altered by the E(56,63)C mutations or by the presence of the bifunctional rhodamine and that the label does not interact with the hydrophobic cleft of sNTnC. Moreover, the overall fold of the protein and the position of the TnI peptide are similar to those observed previously with related cardiac NTnC complexes with residues 147-163 of cardiac TnI [Li et al. (1999) Biochemistry 38, 8289-8298] and including the drug bepridil [Wang et al. (2002) J. Biol. Chem. 277, 31124-31133]. The degree of opening of the structure is reduced as compared to that of calcium-saturated sNTnC in the absence of the switch peptide [Gagni et al. (1995) Nat. Struct. Biol. 2, 784-789]. The switch peptide is bound in a shallow and complementary hydrophobic surface cleft largely defined by helices A and B and also has key ionic interactions with sNTnC. These results show that bifunctional rhodamine probes can be attached to surface helices via suitable pairs of solvent-accessible residues that have been mutated to cysteines, without altering the conformation of the labeled domain. A set of such probes can be used to determine the orientation and motion of the target domain in the cellular environment [Corrie et al. (1999) Nature 400, 425-430; Ferguson et al. (2003) Mol. Cell 11(4), in press].

9010773	The structure, stability, and folding process of amyloidogenic mutant human lysozyme.	The physicochemical properties of an amyloidogenic mutant human lysozyme (Ile56Thr) were examined in order to elucidate the mechanism of amyloid formation. The crystal structure of the mutant protein was the same as the wild-type structure, except that the hydroxyl group of the introduced Thr56 formed a hydrogen bond with a water molecule in the interior of the protein. The other physicochemical properties of the mutant protein in the native state were not different from those of the wild-type protein. However, the equilibrium and kinetic stabilities of the mutant protein were remarkably decreased due to the introduction of a polar residue (Thr) in the interior of the molecule. It can be concluded that the amyloid formation of the mutant human lysozyme is due to a tendency to favor (partly or/and completely) denatured structures.

8528073	Redesign of the substrate specificity of Escherichia coli aspartate aminotransferase to that of Escherichia coli tyrosine aminotransferase by homology modeling and site-directed mutagenesis.	Although several high-resolution X-ray crystallographic structures have been determined for Escherichia coli aspartate aminotransferase (eAATase), efforts to crystallize E. coli tyrosine aminotransferase (eTATase) have been unsuccessful. Sequence alignment analyses of eTATase and eAATase show 43% sequence identity and 72% sequence similarity, allowing for conservative substitutions. The high similarity of the two sequences indicates that both enzymes must have similar secondary and tertiary structures. Six active site residues of eAATase were targeted by homology modeling as being important for aromatic amino acid reactivity with eTATase. Two of these positions (Thr 109 and Asn 297) are invariant in all known aspartate aminotransferase enzymes, but differ in eTATase (Ser 109 and Ser 297). The other four positions (Val 39, Lys 41, Thr 47, and Asn 69) line the active site pocket of eAATase and are replaced by amino acids with more hydrophobic side chains in eTATase (Leu 39, Tyr 41, Ile 47, and Leu 69). These six positions in eAATase were mutated by site-directed mutagenesis to the corresponding amino acids found in eTATase in an attempt to redesign the substrate specificity of eAATase to that of eTATase. Five combinations of the individual mutations were obtained from mutagenesis reactions. The redesigned eAATase mutant containing all six mutations (Hex) displays second-order rate constants for the transamination of aspartate and phenylalanine that are within an order of magnitude of those observed for eTATase. Thus, the reactivity of eAATase with phenylalanine was increased by over three orders of magnitude without sacrificing the high transamination activity with aspartate observed for both enzymes.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

16185060	Crystal structure of Thermobifida fusca endoglucanase Cel6A in complex with substrate and inhibitor: the role of tyrosine Y73 in substrate ring distortion.	Endoglucanase Cel6A from Thermobifida fusca hydrolyzes the beta-1,4 linkages in cellulose at accessible points along the polymer. The structure of the catalytic domain of Cel6A from T. fusca in complex with a nonhydrolysable substrate analogue that acts as an inhibitor, methylcellobiosyl-4-thio-beta-cellobioside (Glc(2)-S-Glc(2)), has been determined to 1.5 A resolution. The glycosyl unit in subsite -1 was sterically hindered by Tyr73 and forced into a distorted (2)S(o) conformation. In the enzyme where Tyr73 was mutated to a serine residue, the hindrance was removed and the glycosyl unit in subsite -1 had a relaxed (4)C(1) chair conformation. The relaxed conformation was seen in two complex structures of the mutated enzyme, with cellotetrose (Glc(4)) at 1.64 A and Glc(2)-S-Glc(2) at 1.04 A resolution.

15276844	X-ray and thermodynamic studies of staphylococcal nuclease variants I92E and I92K: insights into polarity of the protein interior.	We have used crystallography and thermodynamic analysis to study nuclease variants I92E and I92K, in which an ionizable side-chain is placed in the hydrophobic core of nuclease. We find that the energetic cost of burying ionizable groups is rather modest. The X-ray determinations show water molecules solvating the buried glutamic acid under cryo conditions, but not at room temperature. The lysine side-chain does not appear solvated in either case. Guanidine hydrochloride (GnHCl) denaturation of I92E and I92K, done as a function of pH and monitored by tryptophan fluorescence, showed that I92E and I92K are folded in the pH range pH 3.5-9.0 and pH 5.5-9.5, respectively. The stability of the parental protein is independent of pH over a broad range. In contrast, the stabilities of I92E and I92K exhibit a pH dependence, which is quantitatively explained by thermodynamic analysis: the PK(a) value of the buried K92 is 5.6, while that of the buried E92 is 8.65. The free energy difference between burying the uncharged and charged forms of the groups is modest, about 6 kcal/mol. We also found that epsilon(app) for I92K and I92E is in the range approximately 10-12, instead of 2-4 commonly used to represent the protein interior. Side-chains 92E and 92K were uncharged under the conditions of the X-ray experiment. Both are buried completely inside the well-defined hydrophobic core of the variant proteins without forming salt-bridges or hydrogen bonds to other functional groups of the proteins. Under cryo conditions 92E shows a chain of four water molecules, which hydrate one oxygen atom of the carboxyl group of the glutamic acid. Two other water molecules, which are present in the wild-type at all temperatures, are also connected to the water ring observed inside the hydrophobic core. The ready burial of water with an uncharged E92 raises the possibility that solvent excursions into the interior also take place in the wild-type protein, but in a random, dynamic way not detectable by crystallography. Such transient excursions could increase the average polarity, and thus epsilon(app), of the protein interior.

14717710	Mutational and structural analysis of cobalt-containing nitrile hydratase on substrate and metal binding.	Mutants of a cobalt-containing nitrile hydratase (NHase, EC 4.2.1.84) from Pseudonocardia thermophila JCM 3095 involved in substrate binding, catalysis and formation of the active center were constructed, and their characteristics and crystal structures were investigated. As expected from the structure of the substrate binding pocket, the wild-type enzyme showed significantly lower K(m) and K(i) values for aromatic substrates and inhibitors, respectively, than aliphatic ones. In the crystal structure of a complex with an inhibitor (n-butyric acid) the hydroxyl group of betaTyr68 formed hydrogen bonds with both n-butyric acid and alphaSer112, which is located in the active center. The betaY68F mutant showed an elevated K(m) value and a significantly decreased k(cat) value. The apoenzyme, which contains no detectable cobalt atom, was prepared from Escherichia coli cells grown in medium without cobalt ions. It showed no detectable activity. A disulfide bond between alphaCys108 and alphaCys113 was formed in the apoenzyme structure. In the highly conserved sequence motif in the cysteine cluster region, two positions are exclusively conserved in cobalt-containing or iron-containing nitrile hydratases. Two mutants (alphaT109S and alphaY114T) were constructed, each residue being replaced with an iron-containing one. The alphaT109S mutant showed similar characteristics to the wild-type enzyme. However, the alphaY114T mutant showed a very low cobalt content and catalytic activity compared with the wild-type enzyme, and oxidative modifications of alphaCys111 and alphaCys113 residues were not observed. The alphaTyr114 residue may be involved in the interaction with the nitrile hydratase activator protein of P. thermophila.

12083921	Pentalenene synthase. Analysis of active site residues by site-directed mutagenesis.	Incubation of farnesyl diphosphate (1) with the W308F or W308F/H309F mutants of pentalenene synthase, an enzyme from Streptomyces UC5319, yielded pentalenene (2), accompanied by varying proportions of (+)-germacrene A (7) with relatively minor changes in k(cat) and k(cat)/K(m). By contrast, single H309 mutants gave rise to both (+)-germacrene A (7) and protoilludene (8) in addition to pentalenene (2). Mutation to glutamate of each of the three aspartate residues in the Mg(2+)-binding aspartate-rich domain, (80)DDLFD, resulted in reduction in the k(cat)/K(m) for farnesyl diphosphate and formation of varying proportions of pentalenene and (+)-germacrene A (7). Formation of (+)-germacrene A (7) by the various pentalenene synthase mutants is the result of a derailment of the natural anti-Markovnikov cyclization reaction, and not simply the consequence of trapping of a normally cryptic, carbocationic intermediate. Both the N219A and N219L mutants of pentalenene synthase were completely inactive, while the corresponding N219D mutant had a k(cat)/K(m) which was 3300-fold lower than that of the wild-type synthase, and produced a mixture of pentalenene (2) (91%) and the aberrant cyclization product beta-caryophyllene (9) (9%). Finally, the F77Y mutant had a k(cat)/K(m) which was reduced by 20-fold compared to that of the wild-type synthase.

3329733	Proteases of enhanced stability: characterization of a thermostable variant of subtilisin.	A procedure has been developed for the isolation and identification of mutants in the bacterial serine protease subtilisin that exhibit enhanced thermal stability. The cloned subtilisin BPN' gene from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens was treated with bisulfite, a chemical mutagen that deaminates cytosine to uracil in single-stranded DNA. Strains containing the cloned, mutagenized subtilisin gene which produced subtilisin with enhanced thermal stability were selected by a simple plate assay procedure which screens for esterase activity on nitrocellulose filters after preincubation at elevated temperatures. One thermostable subtilisin variant, designated 7150, has been fully characterized and found to differ from wild-type subtilisin by a single substitution of Ser for Asn at position 218. The 7150 enzyme was found to undergo thermal inactivation at one-fourth the rate of the wild-type enzyme when incubated at elevated temperatures. Moreover, the mid-point in the thermally induced transition from the folded to unfolded state was found to be 2.4-3.9 degrees C higher for 7150 as determined by differential scanning calorimetry under a variety of conditions. The refined, 1.8-A crystal structures of the wild-type and 7150 subtilisin have been compared in detail, leading to the conclusion that slight improvements in hydrogen bond parameters in the vicinity of position 218 result in the enhanced thermal stability of 7150.

10811642	Catalytic roles for two water bridged residues (Asp-98 and His-255) in the active site of copper-containing nitrite reductase.	Two active site residues, Asp-98 and His-255, of copper-containing nitrite reductase (NIR) from Alcaligenes faecalis have been mutated to probe the catalytic mechanism. Three mutations at these two sites (D98N, H255D, and H255N) result in large reductions in activity relative to native NIR, suggesting that both residues are involved intimately in the reaction mechanism. Crystal structures of these mutants have been determined using data collected to better than 1. 9-A resolution. In the native structure, His-255 Nepsilon2 forms a hydrogen bond through a bridging water molecule to the side chain of Asp-98, which also forms a hydrogen bond to a water or nitrite oxygen ligated to the active site copper. In the D98N mutant, reorientation of the Asn-98 side chain results in the loss of the hydrogen bond to the copper ligand water, consistent with a negatively charged Asp-98 directing the binding and protonation of nitrite in the native enzyme. An additional solvent molecule is situated between residues 255 and the bridging water in the H255N and H255D mutants and likely inhibits nitrite binding. The interaction of His-255 with the bridging water appears to be necessary for catalysis and may donate a proton to reaction intermediates in addition to Asp-98.

8986758	Kinetic and structural analysis of mutant CD4 receptors that are defective in HIV gp120 binding.	The T-cell antigen coreceptor CD4 also serves as the receptor for the envelope glycoprotein gp120 of HIV. Extensive mutational analysis of CD4 has implicated residues from a portion of the extracellular amino-terminal domain (D1) in gp120 binding. However, none of these proteins has been fully characterized biophysically, and thus the precise effects on molecular structure and binding interactions are unknown. In the present study, we produced soluble versions of three mutant CD4 molecules (F43V, G47S, and A55F) and characterized their structural properties, thermostability, and ability to bind gp120. Crystallographic and thermodynamic analysis showed minimal structural alterations in the F43V and G47S mutant proteins, which have solvent-exposed mutant side chains. In contrast, some degree of disorder appears to exist in the folded state of A55F, as a result of mutating a buried side chain. Real time kinetic measurements of the interaction of the mutant proteins with gp120 showed affinity decreases of 5-fold for G47S, 50-fold for A55F, and 200-fold for F43V. Although both rate constants for the binding reaction were affected by these mutations, the loss in affinity was mainly due to a decrease in on rates, with less drastic changes occurring in the off rates. These observations suggest the involvement of conformational adaptation in the CD4-gp120 interaction. Together, the structural and kinetic data confirm that F43V is a critical residue in gp120 recognition site, which may also include main chain interactions at residue Gly-47.

7583653	Structure-based design of a lysozyme with altered catalytic activity.	Here we show that the substitution Thr 26-->His in the active site of T4 lysozyme causes the product to change from the alpha- to the beta-anomer. This implies an alteration in the catalytic mechanism of the enzyme. From the change in product, together with inspection of relevant crystal structures, it is inferred that wild-type T4 lysozyme is an anomer-inverting enzyme with a single displacement mechanism in which water attacks from the alpha-side of the substrate. In contrast, the mutant T26H is an anomer-retaining enzyme with an apparently double displacement mechanism in which a water molecule attacks from the opposite side of the substrate. The results also show that the mechanism of wild-type T4 lysozyme differs from that of hen egg-white lysozyme even though both enzymes are presumed to have evolved from a common precursor.

8599765	Identification of the primary metal ion-activation sites of the diphtheria tox repressor by X-ray crystallography and site-directed mutational analysis.	The diphtheria tox repressor, DtxR, is a 226 amino acid transition metal ion-activated regulatory protein that controls the expression of diphtheria toxin in toxigenic Corynebacterium diphtheriae. The previously solved three-dimensional DtxR structures have identified two potential metal ion binding sites which may play a role in the activation of DNA binding by the repressor. We have used both X-ray crystallographic and site-directed mutational analysis of DtxR(C102D)-Ni2+ complexes and DtxR to identify the metal ion-binding site which results in the activation of the repressor. We demonstrate that DtxR contains both a primary and an ancillary metal ion binding site. The primary site functions directly in the activation of DNA binding. In contrast, the ancillary site contributes weakly, if at all, to activation.

9811833	A streptavidin mutant with altered ligand-binding specificity.	The biotin-binding site of streptavidin was modified to alter its ligand-binding specificity. In natural streptavidin, the side chains of N23 and S27 make two of the three hydrogen bonds with the ureido oxygen of biotin. These two residues were mutated to severely weaken biotin binding while attempting to maintain the affinity for two biotin analogs, 2-iminobiotin and diaminobiotin. Redesigning of the biotin-binding site used the difference in local electrostatic charge distribution between biotin and these biotin analogs. Free energy calculations predicted that the introduction of a negative charge at the position of S27 plus the mutation N23A should disrupt two of the three hydrogen bonds between natural streptavidin and the ureido oxygen of biotin. In contrast, the imino hydrogen of 2-iminobiotin should form a hydrogen bond with the side chain of an acidic amino acid at position 27. This should reduce the biotin-binding affinity by approximately eight orders of magnitude, while leaving the affinities for these biotin analogs virtually unaffected. In good agreement with these predictions, a streptavidin mutant with the N23A and S27D substitutions binds 2-iminobiotin with an affinity (Ka) of 1 x 10(6) M-1, two orders of magnitude higher than that for biotin (1 x 10(4) M-1). In contrast, the binding affinity of this streptavidin mutant for diaminobiotin (2.7 x 10(4) M-1) was lower than predicted (2.9 x 10(5) M-1), suggesting the position of the diaminobiotin in the biotin-binding site was not accurately determined by modeling.

10493860	Engineered Bacillus lentus subtilisins having altered flexibility.	The three-dimensional structures of engineered variants of Bacillus lentus subtilisin having increased enzymatic activity, K27R/N87S/V104Y/N123S/T274A (RSYSA) and N76D/N87S/S103A/V104I (DSAI), were determined by X-ray crystallography. In addition to identifying changes in atomic position we report a method that identifies protein segments having altered flexibility. The method utilizes a statistical analysis of variance to delineate main-chain temperature factors that represent significant departures from the overall variance between equivalent regions seen throughout the structure. This method reveals changes in main-chain mobility in both variants. Residues 125-127 have increased mobility in the RSYSA variant while residues 100-104 have decreased mobility in the DSAI variant. These segments are located at the substrate-binding site and changes in their mobility are believed to relate to the observed changes in proteolytic activity. The effect of altered crystal lattice contacts on segment flexibility becomes apparent when identical variants, determined in two crystal forms, are compared with the native enzyme.

8805591	Crystal structure of reduced protein R2 of ribonucleotide reductase: the structural basis for oxygen activation at a dinuclear iron site.	BACKGROUND. Ribonucleotide reductases (RNRs) catalyze the formation of the deoxyribonucleotides that are essential for DNA synthesis. The R2 subunit of Escherichia coli RNR is a homodimer containing one dinuclear iron centre per monomer. A tyrosyl radical is essential for catalysis, and is formed via a reaction in which the reduced, diferrous form of the iron centre activates dioxygen. To help understand the mechanism of oxygen activation, we examined the structure of the diferrous form of R2. RESULTS. The crystal structures of reduced forms of both wild type R2 and a mutant of R2 (Ser211--> Ala) have been determined at 1.7 A and 2.2 A resolution, respectively. The diferrous iron centre was compared to the previously determined structure of the oxidized, diferric form of R2. In both forms of R2 the iron centre is coordinated by the same carboxylate dominated ligand sphere, but in the reduced form there are clear conformational changes in three of the carboxylate ligands and the bridging mu-oxo group and two water molecules are lost. In the reduced form of R2 the coordination number decreases from six to four for both ferrous ions, explaining their high reactivity towards dioxygen. The structure of the mutant Ser211--> Ala, known to have impaired reduction kinetics, shows a large conformational change in one of the neighbouring helices although the iron coordination is very similar to the wild type protein. CONCLUSIONS. Carboxylate shifts are often important for carboxylate coordinated metal clusters; they allow the metals to achieve different coordination modes in redox reactions. In the case of reduced R2 these carboxylate shifts allow the formation of accessible reaction sites for dioxygen. The Ser211--> Ala mutant displays a conformational change in the helix containing the mutation, explaining its altered reduction kinetics.

10429209	Structural and kinetic analysis of drug resistant mutants of HIV-1 protease.	Mutants of HIV-1 protease that are commonly selected on exposure to different drugs, V82S, G48V, N88D and L90M, showed reduced catalytic activity compared to the wild-type protease on cleavage site peptides, CA-p2, p6pol-PR and PR-RT, critical for viral maturation. Mutant V82S is the least active (2-20% of wild-type protease), mutants N88D, R8Q, and L90M exhibit activities ranging from 20 to 40% and G48V from 50 to 80% of the wild-type activity. In contrast, D30N is variable in its activity on different substrates (10-110% of wild-type), with the PR-RT site being the most affected. Mutants K45I and M46L, usually selected in combination with other mutations, showed activities that are similar to (60-110%) or greater than (110-530%) wild-type, respectively. No direct relationship was observed between catalytic activity, inhibition, and structural stability. The mutants D30N and V82S were similar to wild-type protease in their stability toward urea denaturation, while R8Q, G48V, and L90M showed 1.5 to 2.7-fold decreased stability, and N88D and K45I showed 1.6 to 1.7-fold increased stability. The crystal structures of R8Q, K45I and L90M mutants complexed with a CA-p2 analog inhibitor were determined at 2.0, 1.55 and 1.88 A resolution, respectively, and compared to the wild-type structure. The intersubunit hydrophobic contacts observed in the crystal structures are in good agreement with the relative structural stability of the mutant proteases. All these results suggest that viral resistance does not arise by a single mechanism.

11567087	Structural investigations of the active-site mutant Asn156Ala of outer membrane phospholipase A: function of the Asn-His interaction in the catalytic triad.	Outer membrane phospholipase A (OMPLA) from Escherichia coli is an integral-membrane enzyme with a unique His-Ser-Asn catalytic triad. In serine proteases and serine esterases usually an Asp occurs in the catalytic triad; its role has been the subject of much debate. Here the role of the uncharged asparagine in the active site of OMPLA is investigated by structural characterization of the Asn156Ala mutant. Asparagine 156 is not involved in maintaining the overall active-site configuration and does not contribute significantly to the thermal stability of OMPLA. The active-site histidine retains an active conformation in the mutant notwithstanding the loss of the hydrogen bond to the asparagine side chain. Instead, stabilization of the correct tautomeric form of the histidine can account for the observed decrease in activity of the Asn156Ala mutant.

12484753	Local protein dynamics and catalysis: detection of segmental motion associated with rate-limiting product release by a glutathione transferase.	Glutathione transferase rGSTM1-1 catalyzes the addition of glutathione (GSH) to 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene, a reaction in which the chemical step is 60-fold faster than the physical step of product release. The hydroxyl group of Y115, located in the active site access channel, controls the egress of product from the active site. The Y115F mutant enzyme has a k(cat) (72 s(-)(1)) that is 3.6-fold larger than that of the native enzyme (20 s(-)(1)). Crystallographic observations and evidence from amide proton exchange kinetics are consistent with localized increases in the degree of segmental motion of the Y115F mutant that are coupled to the enhanced rate of product release. The loss of hydrogen bonding interactions involving the hydroxyl group of Y115 is reflected in subtle alterations in the backbone position, an increase in B-factors for structural elements that comprise the channel to the active site, and, most dramatically, a loss of well-defined electron density near the site of mutation. The kinetics of amide proton exchange are also enhanced by a factor between 3 and 12 in these regions, providing direct, quantitative evidence for changes in local protein dynamics affecting product release. The enhanced product release rate is proposed to derive from a small shift in the equilibrium population of protein conformers that permit egress of the product from the active site.

11866509	Chiral mutagenesis of insulin's hidden receptor-binding surface: structure of an allo-isoleucine(A2) analogue.	The hydrophobic core of vertebrate insulins contains an invariant isoleucine residue at position A2. Lack of variation may reflect this side-chain's dual contribution to structure and function: Ile(A2) is proposed both to stabilize the A1-A8 alpha-helix and to contribute to a "hidden" functional surface exposed on receptor binding. Substitution of Ile(A2) by alanine results in segmental unfolding of the A1-A8 alpha-helix, lower thermodynamic stability and impaired receptor binding. Such a spectrum of perturbations, although of biophysical interest, confounds interpretation of structure-activity relationships. To investigate the specific contribution of Ile(A2) to insulin's functional surface, we have employed non-standard mutagenesis: inversion of side-chain chirality in engineered monomer allo-Ile(A2)-DKP-insulin. Although the analogue retains native structure and stability, its affinity for the insulin receptor is impaired by 50-fold. Thus, whereas insulin's core readily accommodates allo-isoleucine at A2, its activity is exquisitely sensitive to chiral inversion. We propose that the Ile(A2) side-chain inserts within a chiral pocket of the receptor as part of insulin's hidden functional surface.

10387007	Escherichia coli methionine aminopeptidase: implications of crystallographic analyses of the native, mutant, and inhibited enzymes for the mechanism of catalysis.	By improving the expression and purification of Escherichia coli methionine aminopeptidase (eMetAP) and using slightly different crystallization conditions, the resolution of the parent structure was extended from 2.4 to 1.9 A resolution. This has permitted visualization of the coordination geometry and solvent structure of the active-site dinuclear metal center. One solvent molecule (likely a mu-hydroxide) bridges the trigonal bipyramidal (Co1) and octahedral (Co2) cobalt ions. A second solvent (possibly a hydroxide ion) is bound terminally to Co2. A monovalent cation binding site was also identified about 13 A away from the metal center at an interface between the two subdomains of the protein. The first structure of a substrate-like inhibitor, (3R)-amino-(2S)-hydroxyheptanoyl-L-Ala-L-Leu-L-Val-L-Phe-OMe, bound to a methionine aminopeptidase, has also been determined. This inhibitor coordinates the metal center through four interactions as follows: (i) ligation of the N-terminal (3R)-nitrogen to Co2, (ii, iii) bridging coordination of the (2S)-hydroxyl group, and (iv) terminal ligation to Co1 by the keto oxygen of the pseudo-peptide linkage. Inhibitor binding occurs with the displacement of two solvent ligands and the expansion of the coordination sphere of Co1. In addition to the tetradentate, bis-chelate metal coordination, the substrate analogue forms hydrogen bonds with His79 and His178, two conserved residues within the active site of all MetAPs. To evaluate their importance in catalysis His79 and His178 were replaced with alanine. Both substitutions, but especially that of His79, reduce activity. The structure of the His79Ala apoenzyme and the comparison of its electronic absorption spectra with other variants suggest that the loss in activity is not due to a conformational change or a defective metal center. Two different reaction mechanisms are proposed and are compared to those of related enzymes. These results also suggest that inhibitors analogous to that reported here may be useful in preventing angiogenesis in cancer and in the treatment of microbial and fungal infections.

11502177	beta-Ketoacyl-[acyl carrier protein] synthase I of Escherichia coli: aspects of the condensation mechanism revealed by analyses of mutations in the active site pocket.	beta-Ketoacyl-[acyl carrier protein (ACP)] synthase forms new carbon-carbon bonds in three steps: transfer of an acyl primer from ACP to the enzyme, decarboxylation of the elongating substrate and its condensation with the acyl primer substrate. Six residues of Escherichia coli beta-ketoacyl-ACP synthase I (KAS I) implicated in these reactions were subjected to site-directed mutagenesis. Analyses of the abilities of C163A, C163S, H298A, D306A, E309A, K328A, and H333A to carry out the three reactions lead to the following conclusions. The active site Cys-163 is not required for decarboxylation, whereas His-298 and His-333 are indispensable. Neither of the histidines is essential for increasing the nucleophilicity of Cys-163 to enable transfer of the acyl primer substrate. Maintenance of the structural integrity of the active site by Asp-306 and Glu-309 is required for decarboxylation but not for transfer. One function of Lys-328 occurs very early in catalysis, potentially before transfer. These results in conjunction with structural analyses of substrate complexes have led to a model for KAS I catalysis [Olsen, J. G., Kadziola, A., von Wettstein-Knowles, P., Siggaard-Andersen, M., and Larsen, S. (2001) Structure 9, 233-243]. Another facet of catalysis revealed by the mutant analyses is that the acyl primer transfer activity of beta-ketoacyl-ACP synthase I is inhibited by free ACP at physiological concentrations. Differences in the inhibitory response by individual mutant proteins indicate that interaction of free ACP with Cys-163, Asp-306, Glu-309, Lys-328, and His-333 might form a sensitive regulatory mechanism for the transfer of acyl primers.

1422155	1H and 15N resonance assignments and secondary structure of the human thioredoxin C62A, C69A, C73A mutant.	The complete assignment of 1H and 15N backbone resonances and near-complete 1H side-chain resonance assignments have been obtained for the reduced form of a mutant of human thioredoxin (105 residues) in which the three non-active site cysteines have been substituted by alanines: C62A, C69A, C73A. The assignments were made primarily on the basis of three-dimensional 15N-separated nuclear Overhauser and Hartmann-Hahn spectroscopy, in conjunction with two-dimensional homonuclear and heteronuclear correlation experiments. Based on comparisons of short-range and interstrand nuclear Overhauser effects, patterns of amide exchange, and chemical-shift differences, the structure appears essentially unchanged from that of the previously determined solution structure of the native protein [Forman-Kay, J.D. et al. (1991) Biochemistry, 30, 2685-2698]. An assay for thioredoxin shows that the C62A, C69A, C73A mutant retains activity. The assignment of the spectrum for this mutant of human thioredoxin constitutes the basis for future studies aimed at comparing the details of the active-site conformation in the reduced and oxidized forms of the protein.

15170321	DNA cleavage by EcoRV endonuclease: two metal ions in three metal ion binding sites.	Four crystal structures of EcoRV endonuclease mutants K92A and K38A provide new insight into the mechanism of DNA bending and the structural basis for metal-dependent phosphodiester bond cleavage. The removal of a key active site positive charge in the uncleaved K92A-DNA-M(2+) substrate complex results in binding of a sodium ion in the position of the amine nitrogen, suggesting a key role for a positive charge at this position in stabilizing the sharp DNA bend prior to cleavage. By contrast, two structures of K38A cocrystallized with DNA and Mn(2+) ions in different lattice environments reveal cleaved product complexes featuring a common, novel conformation of the scissile phosphate group as compared to all previous EcoRV structures. In these structures, the released 5'-phosphate and 3'-OH groups remain in close juxtaposition with each other and with two Mn(2+) ions that bridge the conserved active site carboxylates. The scissile phosphates are found midway between their positions in the prereactive substrate and postreactive product complexes of the wild-type enzyme. Mn(2+) ions occupy two of the three sites previously described in the prereactive complexes and are plausibly positioned to generate the nucleophilic hydroxide ion, to compensate for the incipient additional negative charge in the transition state, and to ionize a second water for protonation of the 3'-oxyanion. Reconciliation of these findings with earlier X-ray and fluorescence studies suggests a novel mechanism in which a single initially bound metal ion in a third distinct site undergoes a shift in position together with movement of the scissile phosphate deeper into the active site cleft. This reconfigures the local environment to permit binding of the second metal ion followed by movement toward the pentacovalent transition state. The new mechanism suggested here embodies key features of previously proposed two- and three-metal catalytic models, and offers a view of the stereochemical pathway that integrates much of the copious structural and functional data that are available from exhaustive studies in many laboratories.

8515471	Crystals of human growth hormone-receptor complexes. Extracellular domains of the growth hormone and prolactin receptors and a hormone mutant designed to prevent receptor dimerization.	A single-site human growth hormone mutant (hGH[G120R]), which inhibits receptor dimerization, was used to produce single crystals, suitable for high-resolution diffraction studies, of 1:1 complexes with the ligand-binding domain of the growth hormone receptor (hGHbp) and of the prolactin receptor (hPRLbp). Crystals of the hGH[G120R]-hGHbp complex are in space group P4(1)2(1)2 or P4(3)2(1)2 with a = 67.7 A, c = 228.0 A, and diffract to at least 2.2 A. Crystals of the complex between hGH[G120R] and hPRLbp are in space group P2(1)2(1)2 with a = 154.0 A, b = 68.4 A, c = 42.9 A, and diffract to at least 2.8 A. The structures of these two complexes will shed light on the early events in receptor activation, and provide the basis for an analysis of receptor specificity of growth hormone and prolactin.

8946854	Buried polar residues and structural specificity in the GCN4 leucine zipper.	A conserved asparagine (Asn 16) buried in the interface of the GCN4 leucine zipper selectively favours the parallel, dimeric, coiled-coil structure. To test if other polar residues confer oligomerization specificity, the structural effects of Gln and Lys substitutions for Asn 16 were characterized. Like the wild-type peptide, the Asn 16Lys mutant formed exclusively dimers. In contrast, Gln 16, despite its chemical similarity to Asn, allowed the peptide to form both dimers and trimers. The Gln 16 side chain was accommodated by qualitatively different interactions in the dimer and trimer crystal structures. These findings demonstrate that the structural selectivity of polar residues results not only from the burial of polar atoms, but also depends on the complementarity of the side-chain stereochemistry with the surrounding structural environment.

15272161	The role of substrate-binding groups in the mechanism of aspartate-beta-semialdehyde dehydrogenase.	The reversible dephosphorylation of beta-aspartyl phosphate to L-aspartate-beta-semialdehyde (ASA) in the aspartate biosynthetic pathway is catalyzed by aspartate-beta-semialdehyde dehydrogenase (ASADH). The product of this reaction is a key intermediate in the biosynthesis of diaminopimelic acid, an integral component of bacterial cell walls and a metabolic precursor of lysine and also a precursor in the biosynthesis of threonine, isoleucine and methionine. The structures of selected Haemophilus influenzae ASADH mutants were determined in order to evaluate the residues that are proposed to interact with the substrates ASA or phosphate. The substrate Km values are not altered by replacement of either an active-site arginine (Arg270) with a lysine or a putative phosphate-binding group (Lys246) with an arginine. However, the interaction of phosphate with the enzyme is adversely affected by replacement of Arg103 with lysine and is significantly altered when a neutral leucine is substituted at this position. A conservative Glu243 to aspartate mutant does not alter either ASA or phosphate binding, but instead results in an eightfold increase in the Km for the coenzyme NADP. Each of the mutations is shown to cause specific subtle active-site structural alterations and each of these changes results in decreases in catalytic efficiency ranging from significant (approximately 3% native activity) to substantial (<0.1% native activity).

12044159	Interhelical interactions in the gp41 core: implications for activation of HIV-1 membrane fusion.	The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) envelope glycoprotein complex (gp120-gp41) promotes viral entry by mediating the fusion of viral and cellular membranes. Formation of a stable trimer-of-hairpins structure in the gp41 ectodomain brings the two membranes into proximity, leading to membrane fusion. The core of this hairpin structure is a six-helix bundle in which three carboxyl-terminal outer helices pack against an inner trimeric coiled coil. Here we investigate the role of these conserved interhelical interactions on the structure and function of both the envelope glycoprotein and the gp41 core. We have replaced each of the eight amino acids at the buried face of the carboxyl-terminal helix with a representative amino acid, alanine. Structural and physicochemical characterization of the alanine mutants shows that hydrophobic interactions are a dominant factor in the stabilization of the six-helix bundle. Alanine substitutions at the Trp628, Trp631, Ile635, and Ile642 residues also affected envelope processing and/or gp120-gp41 association and abrogated the ability of the envelope glycoprotein to mediate cell-cell fusion. These results suggest that the amino-terminal region of the gp41 outer-layer alpha-helix plays a key role in the sequence of events associated with HIV-1 entry and have implications for the development of antibodies and small-molecule inhibitors of this conserved element.

9826509	Inactivity of N229A thymidylate synthase due to water-mediated effects: isolating a late stage in methyl transfer.	Mutation of thymidylate synthase N229(177) to alanine results in an essentially inactive enzyme, yet it leads to formation of a stable ternary complex. The kinetics of N229(177)A show that kcat for Escherichia coli is reduced by 200-fold while the Km for dUMP is increased 200-fold and the Km for folate increased by tenfold versus the wild-type enzyme. The crystal structures of N229(177)A in complex with dUMP and CB3717, and in complex with dUMP alone are determined at 2.4 A, and 2.5 A resolution. These structures identify the covalently bound ternary complex and show how N229(177)A traps an intermediate, and so becomes inactive in a later step of the reaction. Since the smaller alanine side-chain at N229(177)A does not directly sterically impair binding of ligands, the structures implicate, and place quantitative limits on the involvement of the structured water network in the active site of thymidylate synthase in both catalysis and in determining the binding affinity for dUMP (in contrast, the N229(177)V mutation in Lactobacillus casei has minimal effect on activity).

15554622	Observation of an unprecedented Cu Bis-His site: crystal structure of the H129V mutant of nitrite reductase.	Copper nitrite reductases contain both an electron-transfer type 1 Cu site and a catalytic type 2 Cu site. We have mutated one of the type 2 copper ligating histidines to observe the effect on catalytic turnover. This mutation has created a unique site where Cu is ligated by 2 His Nepsilon2 atoms alone.

9041653	Importance of van der Waals contact between Glu 35 and Trp 109 to the catalytic action of human lysozyme.	The importance of van der Waals contact between Glu 35 and Trp 109 to the active-site structure and the catalytic properties of human lysozyme (HL) has been investigated by site-directed mutagenesis. The X-ray analysis of mutant HLs revealed that both the replacement of Glu 35 by Asp or Ala, and the replacement of Trp 109 by Phe or Ala resulted in a significant but localized change in the active-site cleft geometry. A prominent movement of the backbone structure was detected in the region of residues 110 to 120 and in the region of residues 100 to 115 for the mutations concerning Glu 35 and Trp 109, respectively. Accompanied by the displacement of the main-chain atoms with a maximal deviation of C alpha atom position ranging from 0.7 A to 1.0 A, the mutant HLs showed a remarkable change in the catalytic properties against Micrococcus luteus cell substrate as compared with native HL. Although the replacement of Glu 35 by Ala completely abolished the lytic activity, HL-Asp 35 mutant retained a weak but a certain lytic activity, showing the possible involvement of the side-chain carboxylate group of Asp 35 in the catalytic action. The kinetic consequence derived from the replacement of Trp 109 by Phe or Ala together with the result of the structural change suggested that the structural detail of the cleft lobe composed of the residues 100 to 115 centered at Ala 108 was responsible for the turnover in the reaction of HL against the bacterial cell wall substrate. The results revealed that the van der Waals contact between Glu 35 and Trp 109 was an essential determinant in the catalytic action of HL.

15644204	Tracking the evolution of porphobilinogen synthase metal dependence in vitro.	Metal ions are indispensable cofactors for chemical catalysis by a plethora of enzymes. Porphobilinogen synthases (PBGSs), which catalyse the second step of tetrapyrrole biosynthesis, are grouped according to their dependence on Zn(2+). Using site-directed mutagenesis, we embarked on transforming Zn(2+)-independent Pseudomonas aeruginosa PBGS into a Zn(2+)-dependent enzyme. Nine PBGS variants were generated by permutationally introducing three cysteine residues and a further two residues into the active site of the enzyme to match the homologous Zn(2+)-containing PBGS from Escherichia coli. Crystal structures of seven enzyme variants were solved to elucidate the nature of Zn(2+) coordination at high resolution. The three single-cysteine variants were invariably found to be enzymatically inactive and only one (D139C) was found to bind detectable amounts of Zn(2+). The double mutant A129C/D139C is enzymatically active and binds Zn(2+) in a tetrahedral coordination. Structurally and functionally it mimics mycobacterial PBGS, which bears an equivalent Zn(2+)-coordination site. The remaining two double mutants, without known natural equivalents, reveal strongly distorted tetrahedral Zn(2+)-binding sites. Variant A129C/D131C possesses weak PBGS activity while D131C/D139C is inactive. The triple mutant A129C/D131C/D139C, finally, displays an almost ideal tetrahedral Zn(2+)-binding geometry and a significant Zn(2+)-dependent enzymatic activity. Two additional amino acid exchanges further optimize the active site architecture towards the E.coli enzyme with an additional increase in activity. Our study delineates the potential evolutionary path between Zn(2+)-free and Zn(2+)-dependent PBGS enyzmes showing that the rigid backbone of PBGS enzymes is an ideal framework to create or eliminate metal dependence through a limited number of amino acid exchanges.

9826511	Mutational destabilization of the critical interface water cluster in Scapharca dimeric hemoglobin: structural basis for altered allosteric activity.	A cluster of interface ordered water molecules has been proposed to act as a key mediator of intersubunit communication in the homodimeric hemoglobin of Scapharca inaequivalvis. Mutations of Thr72 to Val and Ile, which lack the hydroxyl group to hydrogen bond the deoxy interface water molecules, result in sharply altered functional properties. We have determined the high resolution (1.6-1. 8 A) crystal structures of these two mutants in both the deoxygenated and CO-liganded states. These structures show minimal protein structural changes relative to the same native derivatives, despite greater than 40-fold increases in oxygen affinity. In the deoxy state of both mutants two water molecules at the periphery of the water cluster are lost, and the remaining cluster water molecules are destabilized. The CO-liganded structures show key differences between the two mutants including a more optimal interface packing involving Ile72 that acts to stabilize its high affinity (R) state. This additional stabilization allows rationalization of its lowered cooperativity within the context of a two-state model. These studies support a key role of ordered water in cooperative functioning and illustrate how subtle structural alterations can result in significantly altered functional properties in an allosteric molecule.

9281429	Crystal structures of a mutant maltotetraose-forming exo-amylase cocrystallized with maltopentaose.	The three-dimensional structures of the catalytic residue Glu219-->Gln mutant of Pseudomonas stutzeri maltotetraose-forming exo-alpha-amylase, and its complex with carbohydrate obtained by cocrystallization with maltopentaose were determined. Two crystal forms were obtained for the complexed enzyme, and a bound maltotetraose was found in each. The structures were analyzed at 2.2 A and 1.9 A resolution, respectively for the uncomplexed and complexed mutant. These structures were compared with the wild-type enzyme structure. In the complexed crystals, the maltotetraose was firmly bound, extensively interacting with the amino acid environments in the active cleft. The non-reducing end glucose unit was hydrogen bonded to the side-chain of Asp160 and the main-chain nitrogen of Gly158, which seem to be predominantly required for the recognition of the non-reducing end of the substrate that determines the exo-wise degradation of this enzyme. The reducing end glucose unit of bound maltotetraose showed clear deformation, adopting a half-chair conformation with extensive hydrogen bonds to surrounding polypeptides. The C1-atom of this deformed glucose unit lies very close to Asp193OD1 with a distance of 2.6 A. The catalytic residue Asp294 is firmly hydrogen-bonded to the O2 and O3-hydroxyl groups of the deformed reducing end glucose unit. Upon binding of the carbohydrate, small but significant induced fits were observed in the regions of Asp294, Phe156, Ile157, and Asp160. Possible roles of the three catalytic residues are also discussed.

11279193	Molecular basis for severe epimerase deficiency galactosemia. X-ray structure of the human V94m-substituted UDP-galactose 4-epimerase.	Galactosemia is an inherited disorder characterized by an inability to metabolize galactose. Although classical galactosemia results from impairment of the second enzyme of the Leloir pathway, namely galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase, alternate forms of the disorder can occur due to either galactokinase or UDP-galactose 4-epimerase deficiencies. One of the more severe cases of epimerase deficiency galactosemia arises from an amino acid substitution at position 94. It has been previously demonstrated that the V94M protein is impaired relative to the wild-type enzyme predominantly at the level of V(max) rather than K(m). To address the molecular consequences the mutation imparts on the three-dimensional architecture of the enzyme, we have solved the structures of the V94M-substituted human epimerase complexed with NADH and UDP-glucose, UDP-galactose, UDP-GlcNAc, or UDP-GalNAc. In the wild-type enzyme, the hydrophobic side chain of Val(94) packs near the aromatic group of the catalytic Tyr(157) and serves as a molecular "fence" to limit the rotation of the glycosyl portions of the UDP-sugar substrates within the active site. The net effect of the V94M substitution is an opening up of the Ala(93) to Glu(96) surface loop, which allows free rotation of the sugars into nonproductive binding modes.

15819891	Small exterior hydrophobic cluster contributes to conformational stability and steroid binding in ketosteroid isomerase from Pseudomonas putida biotype B.	A structural motif called the small exterior hydrophobic cluster (SEHC) has been proposed to explain the stabilizing effect mediated by solvent-exposed hydrophobic residues; however, little is known about its biological roles. Unusually, in Delta(5)-3-ketosteroid isomerase from Pseudomonas putida biotype B (KSI-PI) Trp92 is exposed to solvent on the protein surface, forming a SEHC with the side-chains of Leu125 and Val127. In order to identify the role of the SEHC in KSI-PI, mutants of those amino acids associated with the SEHC were prepared. The W92A, L125A/V127A, and W92A/L125A/V127A mutations largely decreased the conformational stability, while the L125F/V127F mutation slightly increased the stability, indicating that hydrophobic packing by the SEHC is important in maintaining stability. The crystal structure of W92A revealed that the decreased stability caused by the removal of the bulky side-chain of Trp92 could be attributed to the destabilization of the surface hydrophobic layer consisting of a solvent-exposed beta-sheet. Consistent with the structural data, the binding affinities for three different steroids showed that the surface hydrophobic layer stabilized by SEHC is required for KSI-PI to efficiently recognize hydrophobic steroids. Unfolding kinetics based on analysis of the Phi(U) value also indicated that the SEHC in the native state was resistant to the unfolding process, despite its solvent-exposed site. Taken together, our results demonstrate that the SEHC plays a key role in the structural integrity that is needed for KSI-PI to stabilize the hydrophobic surface conformation and thereby contributes both to the overall conformational stability and to the binding of hydrophobic steroids in water solution.

10346917	Mechanistic implications from crystalline complexes of wild-type and mutant adenylosuccinate synthetases from Escherichia coli.	Asp13 and His41 are essential residues of adenylosuccinate synthetase, putatively catalyzing the formation of adenylosuccinate from an intermediate of 6-phosphoryl-IMP. Wild-type adenylosuccinate synthetase and three mutant synthetases (Arg143 --> Leu, Lys16 --> Gln, and Arg303 --> Leu) from Eschericha coli have been crystallized in the presence of IMP, hadacidin (an analogue of L-aspartate), Mg2+, and GTP. The active site of each complex contains 6-phosphoryl-IMP, Mg2+, GDP, and hadacidin, except for the Arg303 --> Leu mutant, which does not bind hadacidin. In response to the formation of 6-phosphoryl-IMP, Asp13 enters the inner coordination sphere of the active site Mg2+. His41 hydrogen bonds with 6-phosphoryl-IMP, except in the Arg303 --> Leu complex, where it remains bound to the guanine nucleotide. Hence, recognition of the active site Mg2+ by Asp13 evidently occurs after the formation of 6-phosphoryl-IMP, but recognition of the intermediate by His41 may require the association of L-aspartate with the active site. Structures reported here support a mechanism in which Asp13 and His41 act as the catalytic base and acid, respectively, in the formation of 6-phosphoryl-IMP, and then act together as catalytic acids in the subsequent formation of adenylosuccinate.

12202494	Electrostatic effects and binding determinants in the catalysis of prolyl oligopeptidase. Site specific mutagenesis at the oxyanion binding site.	Prolyl oligopeptidase, a member of a new family of serine peptidases, plays an important role in memory disorders. Earlier x-ray crystallographic investigations indicated that stabilization of the tetrahedral transition state of the reaction involved hydrogen bond formation between the oxyanion of the tetrahedral intermediate and the OH group of Tyr(473). The contribution of the OH group was tested with the Y473F variant using various substrates. The charged succinyl-Gly-Pro-4-nitroanilide was hydrolyzed with a much lower k(cat)/K(m) compared with the neutral benzyloxycarbonyl-G1y-Pro-2-naphthylamide, although the binding modes of the two substrates were similar, as shown by x-ray crystallography. This suggested that electrostatic interactions between Arg(643) and the succinyl group competed with the productive binding mechanism. Unlike most enzyme reactions, catalysis by the wild-type enzyme exhibited positive activation entropy. In contrast, the activation entropy for the Y473F variant was negative, suggesting that the tyrosine OH group is involved in stabilizing both the transition state and the water shell at the active site. Importantly, Tyr(473) is also implicated in the formation of the enzyme-substrate complex. The nonlinear Arrhenius plot suggested a greater significance of the oxyanion binding site at physiological temperature. The results indicated that Tyr(473) was more needed at high pH, at high temperature, and with charged substrates exhibiting "internally competitive inhibition."

9697776	Structure of the metal-ion-activated diphtheria toxin repressor/tox operator complex.	The virulent phenotype of the pathogenic bacterium Corynebacterium diphtheriae is conferred by diphtheria toxin, whose expression is an adaptive response to low concentrations of iron. The expression of the toxin gene (tox) is regulated by the repressor DtxR, which is activated by transition metal ions. X-ray crystal structures of DtxR with and without (apo-form) its coordinated transition metal ion have established the general architecture of the repressor, identified the location of the metal-binding sites, and revealed a metal-ion-triggered subunit-subunit 'caliper-like' conformational change. Here we report the three-dimensional crystal structure of the complex between a biologically active Ni(II)-bound DtxR(C102D) mutant, in which a cysteine is replaced by an aspartate at residue 102, and a 33-base-pair DNA segment containing the toxin operator toxO. This structure shows that DNA interacts with two dimeric repressor proteins bound to opposite sides of the tox operator. We propose that a metal-ion-induced helix-to-coil structural transition in the amino-terminal region of the protein is partly responsible for the unique mode of repressor activation by transition metal ions.

8962085	Ordered water molecules as key allosteric mediators in a cooperative dimeric hemoglobin.	One of the most remarkable structural aspects of Scapharca dimeric hemoglobin is the disruption of a very well-ordered water cluster at the subunit interface upon ligand binding. We have explored the role of these crystallographically observed water molecules by site-directed mutagenesis and osmotic stress techniques. The isosteric mutation of Thr-72-->Val in the interface increases oxygen affinity more than 40-fold with a surprising enhancement of cooperativity. The only significant structural effect of this mutation is to destabilize two ordered water molecules in the deoxy interface. Wild-type Scapharca hemoglobin is strongly sensitive to osmotic conditions. Upon addition of glycerol, striking changes in Raman spectrum of the deoxy form are observed that indicate a transition toward the liganded form. Increased osmotic pressure, which lowers the oxygen affinity in human hemoglobin, raises the oxygen affinity of Scapharca hemoglobin regardless of whether the solute is glycerol, glucose, or sucrose. Analysis of these results provides an estimate of six water molecules lost upon oxygen binding to the dimer, in good agreement with eight predicted from crystal structures. These experiments suggest that the observed cluster of interfacial water molecules plays a crucial role in communication between subunits.

12820884	Structural and functional importance of first-shell metal ligands in the binuclear manganese cluster of arginase I.	Arginase is a binuclear manganese metalloenzyme that hydrolyzes l-arginine to form l-ornithine and urea. The three-dimensional structures of D128E, D128N, D232A, D232C, D234E, H101N, and H101E arginases I have been determined by X-ray crystallographic methods to elucidate the roles of the first-shell metal ligands in the stability and catalytic activity of the enzyme. This work represents the first structure-based dissection of the binuclear manganese cluster using site-directed mutagenesis and X-ray crystallography. Substitution of the metal ligands compromises the catalytic activity of the enzyme, either by the loss or disruption of the metal cluster or the nucleophilic metal-bridging hydroxide ion. However, the substitution of the metal ligands or the reduction of Mn(2+)(A) or Mn(2+)(B) occupancy does not compromise enzyme-substrate affinity as reflected by K(M), which remains relatively invariant across this series of arginase variants. This implicates a nonmetal binding site for substrate l-arginine in the precatalytic Michaelis complex, as proposed based on analysis of the native enzyme structure (Kanyo, Z. F., Scolnick, L. R., Ash, D. E., and Christianson, D. W. (1996) Nature 383, 554-557).

8175707	Structural basis of the 70-kilodalton heat shock cognate protein ATP hydrolytic activity. II. Structure of the active site with ADP or ATP bound to wild type and mutant ATPase fragment.	The ATPase fragment of the bovine 70-kDa heat shock cognate protein is an attractive construct in which to study its mechanism of ATP hydrolysis. The three-dimensional structure suggests several residues that might participate in the ATPase reaction. Four acidic residues (Asp-10, Glu-175, Asp-199, and Asp-206) have been individually mutated to both the cognate amine (asparagine/glutamine) and to serine, and the effects of the mutations on the kinetics of the ATPase activity (Wilbanks, S. M., DeLuca-Flaherty, C., and McKay, D. B. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 12893-12898) and the structure of the mutant ATPase fragments have been determined, typically to approximately 2.4 A resolution. Additionally, the structures of the wild type protein complexed with MgADP and Pi, MgAMPPNP (5'-adenylyl-beta, gamma-imidodiphosphate) and CaAMPPNP have been refined to 2.1, 2.4, and 2.4 A, respectively. Combined, these structures provide models for the prehydrolysis, MgATP-bound state and the post-hydrolysis, MgADP-bound state of the ATPase fragment. These models suggest a pathway for the hydrolytic reaction in which 1) the gamma phosphate of bound ATP reorients to form a beta, gamma-bidentate phosphate complex with the Mg2+ ion, allowing 2) in-line nucleophilic attack on the gamma phosphate by a H2O molecule or OH- ion, with 3) subsequent release of inorganic phosphate.

15591246	Tyr702 is an important determinant of agonist binding and domain closure of the ligand-binding core of GluR2.	Ionotropic glutamate receptors mediate most rapid excitatory synaptic transmission in the mammalian central nervous system, and their involvement in neurological diseases has stimulated widespread interest in their structure and function. Despite a large number of agonists developed so far, few display selectivity among (S)-2-amino-3-(3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazol-4-yl) propionic acid (AMPA)-receptor subtypes. The present study provides X-ray structures of the glutamate receptor 2 (GluR2)-selective partial agonist (S)-2-amino-3-(1,3,5,6,7-pentahydro-2,4-dioxocyclopenta[e] pyrimidin-1-yl) propanoic acid [(S)-CPW399] in complex with the ligand-binding core of GluR2 (GluR2-S1S2J) and with a (Y702F)GluR2-S1S2J mutant. In addition, the structure of the nonselective partial agonist kainate in complex with (Y702F)GluR2-S1S2J was determined. The results show that the selectivity of (S)-CPW399 toward full-length GluR2 relative to GluR3 is reflected in the binding data on the two soluble constructs, allowing the use of (Y702F)GluR2-S1S2J as a model system for studying GluR2/GluR3 selectivity. Structural comparisons suggest that selectivity arises from disruption of a water-mediated network between ligand and receptor. A D1-D2 domain closure occurs upon agonist binding. (S)-CPW399 and kainate induce greater domain closure in the Y702F mutant, indicating that these partial agonists here act in a manner more reminiscent of full agonists. Both kainate and (S)-CPW399 exhibited higher efficacy at (Y702F)GluR2(Q)i than at wild-type GluR2(Q)i. Whereas an excellent correlation exists between domain closure and efficacy of a range of agonists at full-length GluR2 determined by electrophysiology in Xenopus laevis oocytes, a direct correlation between agonist induced domain closure of (Y702F)GluR2-S1S2J and efficacy at the GluR3 receptor is not observed. Although it clearly controls selectivity, mutation of this residue alone is insufficient to explain agonist-induced conformational rearrangements occurring in this variant.

12925786	Structural studies of hydrogen bonds in the high-affinity streptavidin-biotin complex: mutations of amino acids interacting with the ureido oxygen of biotin.	An elaborate hydrogen-bonding network contributes to the tight binding of biotin to streptavidin. The specific energetic contributions of hydrogen bonds to the biotin ureido oxygen have previously been investigated by mapping the equilibrium and activation thermodynamic signatures of N23A, N23E, S27A, Y43A and Y43F site-directed mutants [Klumb et al. (1998), Biochemistry, 37, 7657-7663]. The crystal structures of these variants in the unbound and biotin-bound states provide structural insight into the energetic alterations and are described here. High (1.5-2.2 A) to atomic resolution (1.14 A) structures were obtained and structural models were refined to R values ranging from 0.12 to 0.20. The overall folding of streptavidin as described previously has not changed in any of the mutant structures. Major deviations such as side-chain shifts of residues in the binding site are observed only for the N23A and Y43A mutations. In none of the mutants is a systematic shift of biotin observed when one of the hydrogen-bonding partners to the ureido oxygen of biotin is removed. Recent thermodynamic studies report increases of DeltaDeltaG(o) of 5.0-14.6 kJ mol(-1) for these mutants with respect to the wild-type protein. The decreasing stabilities of the complexes of the mutants are discussed in terms of their structures.

15710600	Demonstration of isoleucine 199 as a structural determinant for the selective inhibition of human monoamine oxidase B by specific reversible inhibitors.	Several reversible inhibitors selective for human monoamine oxidase B (MAO B) that do not inhibit MAO A have been described in the literature. The following compounds: 8-(3-chlorostyryl)caffeine, 1,4-diphenyl-2-butene, and trans,trans-farnesol are shown to inhibit competitively human, horse, rat, and mouse MAO B with K(i) values in the low micromolar range but are without effect on either bovine or sheep MAO B or human MAO A. In contrast, the reversible competitive inhibitor isatin binds to all known MAO B and MAO A with similar affinities. Sequence alignments and the crystal structures of human MAO B in complex with 1,4-diphenyl-2-butene or with trans,trans-farnesol provide molecular insights into these specificities. These inhibitors span the substrate and entrance cavities with the side chain of Ile-199 rotated out of its normal conformation suggesting that Ile-199 is gating the substrate cavity. Ile-199 is conserved in all known MAO B sequences except bovine MAO B, which has Phe in this position (the sequence of sheep MAO B is unknown). Phe is conserved in the analogous position in MAO A sequences. The human MAO B I199F mutant protein of MAO B binds to isatin (K(i) = 3 microM) but not to the three inhibitors listed above. The crystal structure of this mutant demonstrates that the side chain of Phe-199 interferes with the binding of those compounds. This suggests that the Ile-199 "gate" is a determinant for the specificity of these MAO B inhibitors and provides a molecular basis for the development of MAO B-specific reversible inhibitors without interference with MAO A function in neurotransmitter metabolism.

16285725	Exploring the binding conformations of bulkier dipeptide amide inhibitors in constitutive nitric oxide synthases.	A series of L-nitroarginine-based dipeptide inhibitors are highly selective for neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) over the endothelial isoform (eNOS). Crystal structures of these dipeptides bound to both isoforms revealed two different conformations, curled in nNOS and extended in eNOS, corresponding to higher and lower binding affinity to the two isoforms, respectively. In previous studies we found that the primary reason for selectivity is that Asp597 in nNOS, which is Asn368 in eNOS, provides greater electrostatic stabilization in the inhibitor complex. While this is the case for smaller dipeptide inhibitors, electrostatic stabilization may no longer be the sole determinant for isoform selectivity with bulkier dipeptide inhibitors. Another residue farther away from the active site, Met336 in nNOS (Val106 in eNOS), is in contact with bulkier dipeptide inhibitors. Double mutants were made to exchange the D597/M336 pair in nNOS with N368/V106 in eNOS. Here we report crystal structures and inhibition constants for bulkier dipeptide inhibitors bound to nNOS and eNOS that illustrate the important role played by residues near the entry to the active site in isoform selective inhibition.

14718923	Structural basis for dipeptide amide isoform-selective inhibition of neuronal nitric oxide synthase.	Three nitric oxide synthase (NOS) isoforms, eNOS, nNOS and iNOS, generate nitric oxide (NO) crucial to the cardiovascular, nervous and host defense systems, respectively. Development of isoform-selective NOS inhibitors is of considerable therapeutic importance. Crystal structures of nNOS-selective dipeptide inhibitors in complex with both nNOS and eNOS were solved and the inhibitors were found to adopt a curled conformation in nNOS but an extended conformation in eNOS. We hypothesized that a single-residue difference in the active site, Asp597 (nNOS) versus Asn368 (eNOS), is responsible for the favored binding in nNOS. In the D597N nNOS mutant crystal structure, a bound inhibitor switches to the extended conformation and its inhibition of nNOS decreases >200-fold. Therefore, a single-residue difference is responsible for more than two orders of magnitude selectivity in inhibition of nNOS over eNOS by L-N(omega)-nitroarginine-containing dipeptide inhibitors.

12206666	Crystallographic investigation of the role of aspartate 95 in the modulation of the redox potentials of Desulfovibrio vulgaris flavodoxin.	The side chain of aspartate 95 in flavodoxin from Desulfovibrio vulgaris provides the closest negative charge to N(1) of the bound FMN in the protein. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to substitute alanine, asparagine, or glutamate for this amino acid to assess the effect of this charge on the semiquinone/hydroquinone redox potential (E(1)) of the FMN cofactor. The D95A mutation shifts the E(1) redox potential positively by 16 mV, while a negative shift of 23 mV occurs in the oxidized/semiquinone midpoint redox potential (E(2)). The crystal structures of the oxidized and semiquinone forms of this mutant are similar to the corresponding states of the wild-type protein. In contrast to the wild-type protein, a further change in structure occurs in the D95A mutant in the hydroquinone form. The side chain of Y98 flips into an energetically more favorable edge-to-face interaction with the bound FMN. Analysis of the structural changes in the D95A mutant, taking into account electrostatic interactions at the FMN binding site, suggests that the pi-pi electrostatic repulsions have only a minor contribution to the very low E(1) redox potential of the FMN cofactor when bound to apoflavodoxin. Substitution of D95 with glutamate causes only a slight perturbation of the two one-electron redox potentials of the FMN cofactor. The structure of the D95E mutant reveals a large movement of the 60-loop (residues 60-64) away from the flavin in the oxidized structure. Reduction of this mutant to the hydroquinone causes the conformation of the 60-loop to revert back to that occurring in the structures of the wild-type protein. The crystal structures of the D95E mutant imply that electrostatic repulsion between a carboxylate on the side chain at position 95 and the phenol ring of Y98 prevents rotation of the Y98 side chain to a more energetically favorable conformation as occurs in the D95A mutant. Replacement of D95 with asparagine has no effect on E(2) but causes E(1) to change by 45 mV. The D95N mutant failed to crystallize. The K(d) values of the protein FMN complex in all three oxidation-reduction states differ from those of the wild-type complexes. Molecular modeling showed that the conformational energy of the protein changes with the redox state, in qualitative agreement with the observed changes in K(d), and allowed the electrostatic interactions between the FMN and the surrounding groups on the protein to be quantified.

11563970	Crystal structure of the wild-type and D30A mutant thioredoxin h of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and implications for the catalytic mechanism.	Thioredoxins are ubiquitous proteins which catalyse the reduction of disulphide bridges on target proteins. The catalytic mechanism proceeds via a mixed disulphide intermediate whose breakdown should be enhanced by the involvement of a conserved buried residue, Asp-30, as a base catalyst towards residue Cys-39. We report here the crystal structure of wild-type and D30A mutant thioredoxin h from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, which constitutes the first crystal structure of a cytosolic thioredoxin isolated from a eukaryotic plant organism. The role of residue Asp-30 in catalysis has been revisited since the distance between the carboxylate OD1 of Asp-30 and the sulphur SG of Cys-39 is too great to support the hypothesis of direct proton transfer. A careful analysis of all available crystal structures reveals that the relative positioning of residues Asp-30 and Cys-39 as well as hydrophobic contacts in the vicinity of residue Asp-30 do not allow a conformational change sufficient to bring the two residues close enough for a direct proton transfer. This suggests that protonation/deprotonation of Cys-39 should be mediated by a water molecule. Molecular-dynamics simulations, carried out either in vacuo or in water, as well as proton-inventory experiments, support this hypothesis. The results are discussed with respect to biochemical and structural data.

6372857	Critical role of the A2 amino acid residue in the biological activity of insulin: [2-glycine-A]- and [2-alanine-A]insulins.	We report the synthesis of [2-glycine-A]insulin ([ Gly2 -A]insulin) and [2-alanine-A]insulin ([ Ala2-A]insulin) in which the indicated amino acid has been substituted for isoleucine found in this position in the natural hormone. The circular dichroic (CD) spectra of the analogues were obtained, and their properties were examined in several biological assays. CD studies suggested that the analogues remain monomeric at concentrations at which insulin is partly or mostly dimeric. Both analogues are extremely weak full agonists. [ Gly2 -A]-insulin displays 0.05% of the potency of bovine insulin, whereas [Ala2-A]insulin assays at 0.4% of the activity of the natural hormone. We conclude that the presence of the side chain of isoleucine at position A2 is a critical requirement for high biological activity in insulin. The data, together with previous observations, are discussed in connection with an interaction between the side chain of isoleucine-A2 and the phenolic ring system of tyrosine-A19, which are in van der Waals contact in crystalline insulin. This interaction may be required to permit the molecule to assume a conformation consistent with dimerization and with binding to the insulin receptor.

15610006	Enhancing the activity of insulin at the receptor interface: crystal structure and photo-cross-linking of A8 analogues.	The receptor-binding surface of insulin is broadly conserved, reflecting its evolutionary optimization. Neighboring positions nevertheless offer an opportunity to enhance activity, through either transmitted structural changes or introduction of novel contacts. Nonconserved residue A8 is of particular interest as Thr(A8) --> His substitution (a species variant in birds and fish) augments the potency of human insulin. Diverse A8 substitutions are well tolerated, suggesting that the hormone-receptor interface is not tightly packed at this site. To resolve whether enhanced activity is directly or indirectly mediated by the variant A8 side chain, we have determined the crystal structure of His(A8)-insulin and investigated the photo-cross-linking properties of an A8 analogue containing p-azidophenylalanine. The structure, characterized as a T(3)R(3)(f) zinc hexamer at 1.8 A resolution, is essentially identical to that of native insulin. The photoactivatable analogue exhibits efficient cross-linking to the insulin receptor. The site of cross-linking lies within a 14 kDa C-terminal domain of the alpha-subunit. This contact, to our knowledge the first to be demonstrated from the A chain, is inconsistent with a recent model of the hormone-receptor complex derived from electron microscopy. Optimizing the binding interaction of a nonconserved side chain on the surface of insulin may thus enhance its activity.

9398521	Contribution of water molecules in the interior of a protein to the conformational stability.	Water molecules frequently occur in the interior of globular proteins. To elucidate the contribution of buried water molecules to the conformational stability of a protein, we examined the crystal structures and the thermodynamic parameters of denaturation of six Ile to Ala/Gly mutant human lysozymes, in which a cavity is created at each mutation site by the substitution of a smaller side-chain for a larger one. One or two ordered water molecules were found in the cavities created in some mutants (I106A, I59A and I59G). The cavity volumes for these three mutants were bigger than those that remained empty in the other mutants. The stability of the mutant proteins with the newly introduced water molecules was about 8 kJ/mol higher than that expected from the change in hydrophobic surface area (DeltaDeltaASAHP) exposed upon denaturation. It was concluded that a water molecule in a cavity created in the interior of a protein contributes favorably to the stability.

16008357	Structure-based engineering of internal cavities in coiled-coil peptides.	Cavities and clefts are frequently important sites of interaction between natural enzymes or receptors and their corresponding substrate or ligand molecules and exemplify the types of molecular surfaces that would facilitate engineering of artificial catalysts and receptors. Even so, structural characterizations of designed cavities are rare. To address this issue, we performed a systematic study of the structural effects of single-amino acid substitutions within the hydrophobic cores of tetrameric coiled-coil peptides. Peptides containing single glycine, serine, alanine, or threonine amino acid substitutions at the buried L9, L16, L23, and I26 hydrophobic core positions of a GCN4-based sequence were synthesized and studied by solution-phase and crystallographic techniques. All peptides adopt the expected tetrameric state and contain tunnels or internal cavities ranging in size from 80 to 370 A(3). Two closely related sequences containing an L16G substitution, one of which adopts an antiparallel configuration and one of which adopts a parallel configuration, illustrate that cavities of different volumes and shapes can be engineered from identical core substitutions. Finally, we demonstrate that two of the peptides (L9G and L9A) bind the small molecule iodobenzene when present during crystallization, leaving the general peptide quaternary structure intact but altering the local peptide conformation and certain superhelical parameters. These high-resolution descriptions of varied molecular surfaces within solvent-occluded internal cavities illustrate the breadth of design space available in even closely related peptides and offer valuable models for the engineering of de novo helical proteins.

2916125	Control of enzyme activity by an engineered disulfide bond.	A novel approach to the control of enzyme catalysis is presented in which a disulfide bond engineered into the active-site cleft of bacteriophage T4 lysozyme is capable of switching the activity on and off. Two cysteines (Thr21----Cys and Thr142----Cys) were introduced by oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis into the active-site cleft. These cysteines spontaneously formed a disulfide bond under oxidative conditions in vitro, and the catalytic activity of the oxidized (cross-linked) T4 lysozyme was completely lost. On exposure to reducing agent, however, the disulfide bond was rapidly broken, and the reduced (non-cross-linked) lysozyme was restored to full activity. Thus an enzyme has been engineered such that redox potential can be used to control catalytic activity.

8381964	Pathway of proton transfer in bacterial reaction centers: second-site mutation Asn-M44-->Asp restores electron and proton transfer in reaction centers from the photosynthetically deficient Asp-L213-->Asn mutant of Rhodobacter sphaeroides.	Site-directed mutagenesis of the photosynthetic reaction center (RC) from Rhodobacter sphaeroides has shown Asp-213 of the L subunit (Asp-L213) to be important for photosynthetic viability. Replacement of Asp-L213 with Asn resulted in a photosynthetically deficient mutant, due to the 10(4)-fold slower rate for the proton-coupled electron transfer reaction QA-QB- + 2H+-->QAQBH2 (k(2)AB). The detrimental effect of Asn-L213 is surprising since RCs from Rhodopseudomonas viridis, Rhodospirillum rubrum, and Chloroflexus aurantiacus have Asn at the homologous position. However, RCs from these bacteria have an Asp located near QB (the secondary quinone acceptor) at the position homologous to Asn-M44 in Rb. sphaeroides which might function in place of Asp-L213. To test this conjecture a "viridis-like" structure was introduced into Rb. sphaeroides by replacing Asp-L213 with Asn and Asn-M44 with Asp. The RCs from this double mutant displayed near-native rates for the electron transfer reaction k(2)AB and restored photosynthetic competence. The rates for the first electron transfer reaction QA-QB-->QAQB- (k(1)AB) and charge recombination D+QAQB--->DQAQB (kBD) were also restored to near-native values. These results indicate that Asp at either the L213 or the M44 site near QB can provide a pathway for rapid proton transfer and explain why Asp-L213 need not be conserved in different photosynthetic bacteria. To test further the effect of Asp at M44 on electron and proton transfer to QB a mutant containing Asp at both L213 and M44 was constructed. The RCs from this mutant (Asn-M44-->Asp) exhibited faster proton-coupled electron transfer to QB-. The increased rate of proton-coupled electron transfer (k(2)AB) in the presence of negatively charged Asp residues near QB suggests the role of an Asp near QB as (i) a proton donor group in the proton transfer chain and/or (ii) a negatively charged residue stabilizing proton transfer to reduced QB.

12578370	Dynamic roles of arginine residues 82 and 92 of Escherichia coli 6-hydroxymethyl-7,8-dihydropterin pyrophosphokinase: crystallographic studies.	6-Hydroxymethyl-7,8-dihydropterin pyrophosphokinase (HPPK) catalyzes the pyrophosphoryl transfer from ATP to 6-hydroxymethyl-7,8-dihydropterin (HP), the first reaction in the folate biosynthetic pathway. Arginine residues 82 and 92, strictly conserved in 35 HPPK sequences, play dynamic roles in the catalytic cycle of the enzyme. At 0.89-A resolution, two distinct conformations are observed for each of the two residues in the crystal structure of the wild-type HPPK in complex with two HP variants, two Mg(2+) ions, and an ATP analogue. Structural information suggests that R92 first binds to the alpha-phosphate group of ATP and then shifts to interact with the beta-phosphate as R82, which initially does not bind to ATP, moves in and binds to alpha-phosphate when the pyrophosphoryl transfer is about to occur. The dynamic roles of R82 and R92 are further elucidated by five more crystal structures of two mutant proteins, R82A and R92A, with and without bound ligands. Two oxidized forms of HP are observed with an occupancy ratio of 0.50:0.50 in the 0.89-A structure. The oxidation of HP has significant impact on its binding to the protein as well as the conformation of nearby residue W89.

11993994	The structure of a mutant photosynthetic reaction center shows unexpected changes in main chain orientations and quinone position.	We report on the unexpected structural changes caused by substitution of acidic amino acids in the Q(B) binding pocket of the bacterial photosynthetic reaction center by alanines. The mutations targeted key residues L212Glu and L213Asp of this transmembrane protein-cofactor complex. The amino acid substitutions in the L212Ala-L213Ala mutant reaction center ("AA") were known to affect the delivery of protons after the light-induced generation of Q(B)(-), which renders the AA strain incapable of photosynthetic growth. The AA structure not only revealed side chain rearrangements but also showed movement of the main chain segments that are contiguous with the mutation sites. The alanine substitutions caused an expansion of the cavity rather than its collapse. In addition, Q(B) is found mainly in the binding site that is proximal to the iron-ligand complex (closest to Q(A)) as opposed to its distal binding site (furthest from Q(A)) in the structure of the wild-type reaction center. The observed rearrangements in the structure of the AA reaction center establish a new balance between charged residues of an interactive network near Q(B). This structurally and electrostatically altered complex forms the basis for future understanding of the structural basis for proton transfer in active reaction centers which retain the alanine substitutions but carry a distant compensatory mutation.

12433916	High resolution crystal structures of human Rab5a and five mutants with substitutions in the catalytically important phosphate-binding loop.	GTPase domain crystal structures of Rab5a wild type and five variants with mutations in the phosphate-binding loop are reported here at resolutions up to 1.5 A. Of particular interest, the A30P mutant was crystallized in complexes with GDP, GDP+AlF(3), and authentic GTP, respectively. The other variant crystals were obtained in complexes with a non-hydrolyzable GTP analog, GppNHp. All structures were solved in the same crystal form, providing an unusual opportunity to compare structures of small GTPases with different catalytic rates. The A30P mutant exhibits dramatically reduced GTPase activity and forms a GTP-bound complex stable enough for crystallographic analysis. Importantly, the A30P structure with bound GDP plus AlF(3) has been solved in the absence of a GTPase-activating protein, and it may resemble that of a transition state intermediate. Conformational changes are observed between the GTP-bound form and the transition state intermediate, mainly in the switch II region containing the catalytic Gln(79) residue and independent of A30P mutation-induced local alterations in the P-loop. The structures suggest an important catalytic role for a P-loop backbone amide group, which is eliminated in the A30P mutant, and support the notion that the transition state of GTPase-mediated GTP hydrolysis is of considerable dissociative character.

9341204	Site-directed mutants of pseudoazurin: explanation of increased redox potentials from X-ray structures and from calculation of redox potential differences.	In order to understand the origins of differences in redox potentials among cupredoxins (small blue type I copper-containing proteins that reversibly change oxidation state and interact with redox partners), we have determined the structures of the native and two mutants (P80A and P80I) of pseudoazurin from Alcaligenes faecalis S-6 in oxidized and reduced forms at resolutions of 2.2 A in the worst case and 1.6 A in the best case. The P80A mutation creates a surface pocket filled by a new water molecule, whereas the P80I mutant excludes this water. Distinct patterns of change occur in response to reduction for all three molecules: the copper position shifts, Met 7 and Pro 35 move, and the relative orientations of residues 81 to 16, 18 to the amide planes of 77 and 86, all change. Systematic changes in the weak electrostatic interactions seen in the structures of different oxidation states can explain the Met 7/Pro 35 structural differences as well as some fluctuating solvent positions. Overall displacement parameters increase reversibly upon reduction. The reduced forms are slightly expanded over the oxidized forms. The geometries of the mutants become more trigonal in their reduced forms, consistent with higher redox potentials (+409 mV for P80A and +450 mV for P80I). Calculations of the differences in redox potentials, using POLARIS, reveal that a water unique to the P80A mutant is required (with correctly oriented hydrogens) to approximate the observed difference in redox potential. The POLARIS calculations suggest that the reduced forms are additionally stabilized through changes in the solvation of the copper center, specifically via the amides of residues 16, 39, 41, 79, and 80 which interact with either Phe 18, Met 86, or Cys 78. The redox potential of P80A is increased largely due to solvation effects, whereas the redox potential of P80I is increased largely due to geometrical effects.

8003964	Enzyme IIBcellobiose of the phosphoenol-pyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase system of Escherichia coli: backbone assignment and secondary structure determined by three-dimensional NMR spectroscopy.	The assignment of backbone resonances and the secondary structure determination of the Cys 10 Ser mutant of enzyme IIBcellobiose of the Escherichia coli cellobiose-specific phosphoenol-pyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase system are presented. The backbone resonances were assigned using 4 triple resonance experiments, the HNCA and HN(CO)CA experiments, correlating backbone 1H, 15N, and 13C alpha resonances, and the HN(CA)CO and HNCO experiments, correlating backbone 1H,15N and 13CO resonances. Heteronuclear 1H-NOE 1H-15N single quantum coherence (15N-NOESY-HSQC) spectroscopy and heteronuclear 1H total correlation 1H-15N single quantum coherence (15N-TOCSY-HSQC) spectroscopy were used to resolve ambiguities arising from overlapping 13C alpha and 13CO frequencies and to check the assignments from the triple resonance experiments. This procedure, together with a 3-dimensional 1H alpha-13C alpha-13CO experiment (COCAH), yielded the assignment for all observed backbone resonances. The secondary structure was determined using information both from the deviation of observed 1H alpha and 13C alpha chemical shifts from their random coil values and 1H-NOE information from the 15N-NOESY-HSQC. These data show that enzyme IIBcellobiose consists of a 4-stranded parallel beta-sheet and 5 alpha-helices. In the wild-type enzyme IIBcellobiose, the catalytic residue appears to be located at the end of a beta-strand.

15128738	Atomic resolution structures and solution behavior of enzyme-substrate complexes of Enterobacter cloacae PB2 pentaerythritol tetranitrate reductase. Multiple conformational states and implications for the mechanism of nitroaromatic explosive degradation.	The structure of pentaerythritol tetranitrate (PETN) reductase in complex with the nitroaromatic substrate picric acid determined previously at 1.55 A resolution indicated additional electron density between the indole ring of residue Trp-102 and the nitro group at C-6 of picrate. The data suggested the presence of an unusual bond between substrate and the tryptophan side chain. Herein, we have extended the resolution of the PETN reductase-picric acid complex to 0.9 A. This high-resolution analysis indicates that the active site is partially occupied with picric acid and that the anomalous density seen in the original study is attributed to the population of multiple conformational states of Trp-102 and not a formal covalent bond between the indole ring of Trp-102 and picric acid. The significance of any interaction between Trp-102 and nitroaromatic substrates was probed further in solution and crystal complexes with wild-type and mutant (W102Y and W102F) enzymes. Unlike with wild-type enzyme, in the crystalline form picric acid was bound at full occupancy in the mutant enzymes, and there was no evidence for multiple conformations of active site residues. Solution studies indicate tighter binding of picric acid in the active sites of the W102Y and W102F enzymes. Mutation of Trp-102 does not impair significantly enzyme reduction by NADPH, but the kinetics of decay of the hydride-Meisenheimer complex are accelerated in the mutant enzymes. The data reveal that decay of the hydride-Meisenheimer complex is enzyme catalyzed and that the final distribution of reaction products for the mutant enzymes is substantially different from wild-type enzyme. Implications for the mechanism of high explosive degradation by PETN reductase are discussed.

9335537	Probing the roles of active site residues in phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C from Bacillus cereus by site-directed mutagenesis.	The role of amino acid residues located in the active site pocket of phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C (PI-PLC) from Bacillus cereus[Heinz, D. W., Ryan, M., Bullock, T., & Griffith, O. H. (1995) EMBO J. 14, 3855-3863] was investigated by site-directed mutagenesis, kinetics, and crystal structure analysis. Twelve residues involved in catalysis and substrate binding (His32, Arg69, His82, Gly83, Lys115, Glu117, Arg163, Trp178, Asp180, Asp198, Tyr200, and Asp274) were individually replaced by 1-3 other amino acids, resulting in a total number of 21 mutants. Replacements in the mutants H32A, H32L, R69A, R69E, R69K, H82A, H82L, E117K, R163I, D198A, D198E, D198S, Y200S, and D274S caused essentially complete inactivation of the enzyme. The remaining mutants (G83S, K115E, R163K, W178Y, D180S, Y200F, and D274N) exhibited reduced activities up to 57% when compared with wild-type PI-PLC. Crystal structures determined at a resolution ranging from 2.0 to 2.7 A for six mutants (H32A, H32L, R163K, D198E, D274N, and D274S) showed that significant changes were confined to the site of the respective mutation without perturbation of the rest of the structure. Only in mutant D198E do the side chains of two neighboring arginine residues move across the inositol binding pocket toward the newly introduced glutamic acid. An analysis of these structure-function relationships provides new insight into the catalytic mechanism, and suggests a molecular explanation of some of the substrate stereospecificity and inhibitor binding data available for this enzyme.

16316975	Separate ion pathways in a Cl-/H+ exchanger.	CLC-ec1 is a prokaryotic CLC-type Cl(-)/H+ exchange transporter. Little is known about the mechanism of H+ coupling to Cl-. A critical glutamate residue, E148, was previously shown to be required for Cl(-)/H+ exchange by mediating proton transfer between the protein and the extracellular solution. To test whether an analogous H+ acceptor exists near the intracellular side of the protein, we performed a mutagenesis scan of inward-facing carboxyl-bearing residues and identified E203 as the unique residue whose neutralization abolishes H+ coupling to Cl- transport. Glutamate at this position is strictly conserved in all known CLCs of the transporter subclass, while valine is always found here in CLC channels. The x-ray crystal structure of the E203Q mutant is similar to that of the wild-type protein. Cl- transport rate in E203Q is inhibited at neutral pH, and the double mutant, E148A/E203Q, shows maximal Cl- transport, independent of pH, as does the single mutant E148A. The results argue that substrate exchange by CLC-ec1 involves two separate but partially overlapping permeation pathways, one for Cl- and one for H+. These pathways are congruent from the protein's extracellular surface to E148, and they diverge beyond this point toward the intracellular side. This picture demands a transport mechanism fundamentally different from familiar alternating-access schemes.

15381425	The crystal structure of an EST2 mutant unveils structural insights on the H group of the carboxylesterase/lipase family.	Esterase 2 (EST2) from the thermophilic eubacterium Alicyclobacillus acidocaldarius is a thermostable serine hydrolase belonging to the H group of the esterase/lipase family. This enzyme hydrolyzes monoacylesters of different acyl-chain length and various compounds with industrial interest. EST2 displays an optimal temperature at 70 degrees C and maximal activity with pNP-esters having acyl-chain bearing from six to eight carbon atoms. EST2 mutants with different substrate specificity were also designed, generated by site-directed mutagenesis, and biochemically characterized. To better define at structural level the enzyme reaction mechanism, a crystallographic analysis of one of these mutants, namely M211S/R215L, was undertaken. Here we report its three-dimensional structure at 2.10A resolution. Structural analysis of the enzyme revealed an unexpected dimer formation as a consequence of a domain-swapping event involving its N-terminal region. This phenomenon was absent in the case of the enzyme bound to an irreversible inhibitor having optimal substrate structural features. A detailed comparison of the enzyme structures before and following binding to this molecule showed a movement of the N-terminal helices resulting from a trans-cis isomerization of the F37-P38 peptide bond. These findings suggest that this carboxylesterase presents two distinct structural arrangements reminiscent of the open and closed forms already reported for lipases. Potential biological implications associated with the observed quaternary reorganization are here discussed in light of the biochemical properties of other lipolytic members of the H group.

7556224	Changing the reaction specificity of a pyridoxal-5'-phosphate-dependent enzyme.	The electron distribution in the coenzyme-substrate adduct of aspartate aminotransferase was changed by replacing active-site Arg386 with alanine and introducing a new arginine residue nearby. [Y225R, R386A]Aspartate aminotransferase decarboxylates L-aspartate to L-alanine (kcat = 0.04 s-1), while its transaminase activity towards dicarboxylic amino acids is decreased by three orders of magnitude (kcat = 0.19 s-1). Molecular-dynamics simulations based on the crystal structure of the mutant enzyme suggest that a new hydrogen bond to the imine N atom of the pyridoxal-5'-phosphate- aspartate adduct and an altered electrostatic potential around its beta-carboxylate group underlie the 650,000-fold increase in the ratio of beta-decarboxylase/transaminase activity.

15201273	Structure--activity relationships of hainantoxin-IV and structure determination of active and inactive sodium channel blockers.	Hainantoxin-IV (HNTX-IV) can specifically inhibit the neuronal tetrodotoxin-sensitive sodium channels and defines a new class of depressant spider toxin. The sequence of native HNTX-IV is ECLGFGKGCNPSNDQCCKSSNLVCSRKHRWCKYEI-NH(2). In the present study, to obtain further insight into the primary and tertiary structural requirements of neuronal sodium channel blockers, we determined the solution structure of HNTX-IV as a typical inhibitor cystine knot motif and synthesized four mutants designed based on the predicted sites followed by structural elucidation of two inactive mutants. Pharmacological studies indicated that the S12A and R26A mutants had activities near that of native HNTX-IV, while K27A and R29A demonstrated activities reduced by 2 orders of magnitude. (1)H MR analysis showed the similar molecular conformations for native HNTX-IV and four synthetic mutants. Furthermore, in the determined structures of K27A and R29A, the side chains of residues 27 and 29 were located in the identical spatial position to those of native HNTX-IV. These results suggested that residues Ser(12), Arg(26), Lys(27), and Arg(29) were not responsible for stabilizing the distinct conformation of HNTX-IV, but Lys(27) and Arg(29) were critical for the bioactivities. The potency reductions produced by Ala substitutions were primarily due to the direct interaction of the essential residues Lys(27) and Arg(29) with sodium channels rather than to a conformational change. After comparison of these structures and activities with correlated toxins, we hypothesized that residues Lys(27), Arg(29), His(28), Lys(32), Phe(5), and Trp(30) clustered on one face of HNTX-IV were responsible for ligand binding.

11223513	Structures of two highly homologous bacterial L-asparaginases: a case of enantiomorphic space groups.	Quasi-enantiomorphic crystals of the Y25F mutant of Escherichia coli L-asparaginase and of the native Erwinia chrysanthemi L-asparaginase were obtained in the hexagonal space groups P6(5)22 and P6(1)22, respectively. The structures of these highly homologous enzymes were solved by molecular replacement and were refined with data extending to 2.2-2.5 A. These structures were compared with each other, as well as with other L-asparaginase structures previously observed with different crystal packing. It is concluded that the observed phenomenon, which is rare, was most likely to have arisen by chance.

12939145	Molecular engineering of myoglobin: influence of residue 68 on the rate and the enantioselectivity of oxidation reactions catalyzed by H64D/V68X myoglobin.	In the elucidation of structural requirements of heme vicinity for hydrogen peroxide activation, we found that the replacement of His-64 of myoglobin (Mb) with a negatively charged aspartate residue enhanced peroxidase and peroxygenase activities by 78- and 580-fold, respectively. Since residue 68 is known to influence the ligation of small molecules to the heme iron, we constructed H64D/V68X Mb bearing Ala, Ser, Leu, Ile, and Phe at position 68 to improve the oxidation activity. The Val-68 to Leu mutation of H64D Mb accelerates the reaction with H(2)O(2) to form a catalytic species, called compound I, and improves the one-electron oxidation of 2,2'-azinobis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS) (i.e., peroxidase activity) approximately 2-fold. On the other hand, H64D/V68I Mb oxygenates thioanisole 2.7- and 1600-fold faster than H64D and wild-type Mb, respectively. In terms of the enantioselectivity, H64D/V68A and H64D/V68S Mb were good chiral catalysts for thioanisole oxidation and produced the (R)-sulfoxide dominantly with 84% and 88% ee, respectively [Kato, S., et al. (2002) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124, 8506-8507]. On the contrary, the substitution of Val-68 in H64D Mb with an isoleucine residue alters the dominant sulfoxide product from the (R)- to the (S)-isomer. The crystal structures of H64D/V68A and H64D/V68S Mb elucidated in this study do not clearly indicate residues interacting with thioanisole. However, comparison of the active site structures provides the basis to interpret the changes in oxidation activity: (1) direct steric interactions between residue 68 and substrates (i.e., H(2)O(2), ABTS, thioanisole) and (2) the polar interactions between tightly hydrogen-bonded water molecules and substrates.

9000632	Crystal structures of 8-Cl and 9-Cl TIBO complexed with wild-type HIV-1 RT and 8-Cl TIBO complexed with the Tyr181Cys HIV-1 RT drug-resistant mutant.	Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) reverse transcriptase (RT) is an important target for chemotherapeutic agents used in the treatment of AIDS; the TIBO compounds are potent non-nucleoside inhibitors of HIV-1 RT (NNRTIs). Crystal structures of HIV-1 RT complexed with 8-Cl TIBO (R86183, IC50 = 4.6 nM) and 9-Cl TIBO (R82913, IC50 = 33 nM) have been determined at 3.0 A resolution. Mutant HIV-1 RT, containing Cys in place of Tyr at position 181 (Tyrl81Cys), is highly resistant to many NNRTIs and HIV-1 variants containing this mutation have been selected in both cell culture and clinical trials. We also report the crystal structure of Tyrl81Cys HIV-1 RT in complex with 8-Cl TIBO (IC50 = 130 nM) determined at 3.2 A resolution. Averaging of the electron density maps computed for different HIV-1 RT/NNRTI complexes and from diffraction datasets obtained using a synchrotron source from frozen (-165 degrees C) and cooled (-10 degrees C) crystals of the same complex was employed to improve the quality of electron density maps and to reduce model bias. The overall locations and conformations of the bound inhibitors in the complexes containing wild-type HIV-1 RT and the two TIBO inhibitors are very similar, as are the overall shapes and volumes of the non-nucleoside inhibitor-binding pocket (NNIBP). The major differences between the two wild-type HIV-1 RT/TIBO complexes occur in the vicinity of the TIBO chlorine substituents and involve the polypeptide segments around the beta5-beta6 connecting loop (residues 95 to 105) and the beta13-beta14 hairpin (residues 235 and 236). In all known structures of HIV-1 RT/NNRTI complexes, including these two, the position of the beta12-beta13 hairpin or the "primer grip" is significantly displaced relative to the position in the structure of HIV-1 RT complexed with a double-stranded DNA and in unliganded HIV-1 RT structures. Since the primer grip helps to position the template-primer, this displacement suggests that binding of NNRTIs would affect the relative positions of the primer terminus and the polymerase active site. This could explain biochemical data showing that NNRTI binding to HIV-1 RT reduces efficiency of the chemical step of DNA polymerization, but does not prevent binding of either dNTPs or DNA. When the structure of the Tyr181Cys mutant HIV-1 RT in complex with 8-Cl TIBO is compared with the corresponding structure containing wild-type HIV-1 RT, the overall conformations of Tyr181Cys and wild-type HIV-1 RT and of the 8-Cl TIBO inhibitors are very similar. Some positional changes in the polypeptide backbone of the beta6-beta10-beta9 sheet containing residue 181 are observed when the Tyr181Cys and wild-type complexes are compared, particularlty near residue Val179 of beta9. In the p51 subunit, the Cys181 side-chain is oriented in a similar direction to the Tyr181 side-chain in the wild-type complex. However, the electron density corresponding to the sulfur of the Cys181 side-chain in the p66 subunit is very weak, indicating that the thiol group is disordered, presumably because there is no significant interaction with either 8-Cl TIBO or nearby amino acid residues. In the mutant complex, there are slight rearrangements of the side-chains of other amino acid residues in the NNIBP and of the flexible dimethylallyl group of 8-Cl TIBO; these conformational changes could potentially compensate for the interactions that were lost when the relatively large tyrosine at position 181 was replaced by a less bulky cysteine residue. In the corresponding wild-type complex, Tyr181 iin the p66 subunit has significant interactions with the bound inhibitor and the position of the Tyr181 side-chain is well defined in both subunits. Apparently the Tyr181 --> Cys mutation eliminates favorable contacts of the aromatic ring of the tyrosine and the bou

10702294	Re-engineering of human urokinase provides a system for structure-based drug design at high resolution and reveals a novel structural subsite.	Inhibition of urokinase has been shown to slow tumor growth and metastasis. To utilize structure-based drug design, human urokinase was re-engineered to provide a more optimal crystal form. The redesigned protein consists of residues Ile(16)-Lys(243) (in the chymotrypsin numbering system; for the urokinase numbering system it is Ile(159)-Lys(404)) and two point mutations, C122A and N145Q (C279A and N302Q). The protein yields crystals that diffract to ultra-high resolution at a synchrotron source. The native structure has been refined to 1.5 A resolution. This new crystal form contains an accessible active site that facilitates compound soaking, which was used to determine the co-crystal structures of urokinase in complex with the small molecule inhibitors amiloride, 4-iodo-benzo(b)thiophene-2-carboxamidine and phenylguanidine at 2. 0-2.2 A resolution. All three inhibitors bind at the primary binding pocket of urokinase. The structures of amiloride and 4-iodo-benzo(b)thiophene-2-carboxamidine also reveal that each of their halogen atoms are bound at a novel structural subsite adjacent to the primary binding pocket. This site consists of residues Gly(218), Ser(146), and Cys(191)-Cys(220) and the side chain of Lys(143). This pocket could be utilized in future drug design efforts. Crystal structures of these three inhibitors in complex with urokinase reveal strategies for the design of more potent nonpeptidic urokinase inhibitors.

11800562	Crystal structures of mutant forms of the Bacillus caldolyticus cold shock protein differing in thermal stability.	The cold shock proteins Bc-Csp from the thermophile Bacillus caldolyticus and Bs-CspB from the mesophile Bacillus subtilis differ significantly in their conformational stability, although the two proteins differ by only 12 out of 67 amino acid residues. The three-dimensional structure of these small and compact beta-barrel proteins without disulfide bonds, cis-proline residues or tightly bound cofactors is very similar. Previous work has shown that Bc-Csp displays a twofold increase in the free energy of stabilization relative to its homolog Bs-CspB, and indicated that electrostatic interactions are, in part, responsible for this effect. It was further described that the stability difference is almost exclusively due to surface-exposed charged residues at sequence positions 3 and 66 of Bc-Csp and Bs-CspB, whereas all other amino acid changes between both proteins have no net effect on stability. To investigate how two surface residues determine the stability of Bc-Csp, Arg3 and Leu66 were replaced by glutamic acid, corresponding to the Bs-CspB sequence. The crystal structures of the resultant protein variants, Bc-Csp R3E and Bc-Csp L66E, were determined at 1.4 A and 1.27 A resolution, and refined to R values of 13.9 % and 15.8 %, respectively. Both structures closely resemble Bc-Csp in their global fold and show different hydrogen bonding and salt-bridge patterns when two independent molecules in the asymmetric unit of the crystal are compared. To extend the study to neighbored residues that help determine the surface charge around Arg3 and Leu66, the mutant proteins Bc-Csp E46A, Bc-Csp R3E/E46A/L66E and Bc-Csp V64T/L66E/67A were crystallized. Their structures were determined at resolutions of 1.8 A, 1.32 A and 1.8 A and refined to R values of 18.5 %, 13.8 % and 19.3 %, respectively. A systematic comparison of the crystal structures of all forms of the B. caldolyticus cold shock protein shows varying patterns of hydrogen bonds and electrostatic interactions around residues 3 and 66. Thermal destabilization of the protein by mutation appears to correlate with the extent of an acidic surface patch near the C-terminal carboxylate group.

11420435	The energetic cost of induced fit catalysis: Crystal structures of trypsinogen mutants with enhanced activity and inhibitor affinity.	The contribution of induced fit to enzyme specificity has been much debated, although with little experimental data. Here we probe the effect of induced fit on enzyme specificity using the trypsin(ogen) system. BPTI is known to induce trypsinogen to assume a trypsinlike conformation. Correlations are observed between BPTI affinity and the values of k(cat)/K(m) for the hydrolysis of two substrates by eight trypsin(ogen) variants. The slope of both correlations is -1.8. The crystal structures of the BPTI complexes of four variant trypsinogens were also solved. Three of these enzymes, K15A, DeltaI16V17/D194N, and DeltaI16V17/Q156K trypsinogen, are 10- to 100-fold more active than trypsinogen. The fourth variant, DeltaI16V17 trypsinogen, is the lone outlier in the correlations; its activity is lower than expected based on its affinity for BPTI. The S1 site and oxyanion hole, formed by segments 184A-194 and 216-223, are trypsinlike in all of the enzymes. These structural and kinetic data confirm that BPTI induces an active conformation in the trypsin(ogen) variants. Thus, changes in BPTI affinity monitor changes in the energetic cost of inducing a trypsinlike conformation. Although the S1 site and oxyanion hole are similar in all four variants, the N-terminal and autolysis loop (residues 142-152) segments have different interactions for each variant. These results indicate that zymogen activity is controlled by a simple conformational equilibrium between active and inactive conformations, and that the autolysis loop and N-terminal segments control this equilibrium. Together, these data illustrate that induced fit does not generally contribute to enzyme specificity.

8401227	Use of proline mutants to help solve the NMR solution structure of type III antifreeze protein.	To help understand the structure/function relationships in antifreeze proteins (AFP), and to define the motifs required for ice binding, a Type III AFP suitable for two-dimensional (2D) NMR studies was produced in Escherichia coli. A synthetic gene for one of the Type III AFP isoforms was assembled in a T7 polymerase-directed expression vector. The 67-amino acid-long gene product differed from the natural AFP by inclusion of an N-terminal methionine but was indistinguishable in activity. The NMR spectra of this AFP were complicated by cis-trans proline isomerization from the C-terminal sequence YPPA. Substitution of this sequence by YAA eliminated isomer signals without altering the activity or structure of the mutant AFP. This variant (rQAE m1.1) was selected for sequential assignment and the secondary structure determination using 2D 1H NMR spectroscopy. Nine beta-strands are paired to form two triple-stranded antiparallel sheets and one double-stranded antiparallel sheet. Two further proline replacements, P29A and P33A, were made to delineate the role of conserved prolines in Type III AFP. These mutants were valuable in clarifying ambiguous NMR spectral assignments amongst the remaining six prolines of rQAE m1.1. In contrast to the replacement of the C-terminal prolyl residues, the exchange of P29 and P33 caused some structural changes and significantly decreased protein solubility and antifreeze activity.

14744126	Tazobactam forms a stoichiometric trans-enamine intermediate in the E166A variant of SHV-1 beta-lactamase: 1.63 A crystal structure.	Many pathogenic bacteria develop antibiotic resistance by utilizing beta-lactamases to degrade penicillin-like antibiotics. A commonly prescribed mechanism-based inhibitor of beta-lactamases is tazobactam, which can function either irreversibly or in a transient manner. We have demonstrated previously that the reaction between tazobactam and a deacylation deficient variant of SHV-1 beta-lactamase, E166A, could be followed in single crystals using Raman microscopy [Helfand, M. S., et al. (2003) Biochemistry 42, 13386-13392]. The Raman data show that maximal populations of an enamine-like intermediate occur 20-30 min after "soaking in" has commenced. By flash-freezing crystals in this time frame, we were able to trap the enamine species. The resulting 1.63 A resolution crystal structure revealed tazobactam covalently bound in the trans-enamine intermediate state with close to 100% occupancy in the active site. The Raman data also indicated that tazobactam forms a larger population of enamine than sulbactam or clavulanic acid does and that tazobactam's intermediate is also the most long-lived. The crystal structure provides a rationale for this finding since only tazobactam is able to form favorable intra- and intermolecular interactions in the active site that stabilize this trans-enamine intermediate. These interactions involve both the sulfone and triazolyl groups that distinguish tazobactam from clavulanic acid and sulbactam, respectively. The observed stabilization of the transient intermediate of tazobactam is thought to contribute to tazobactam's superior in vitro and in vivo clinical efficacy. Understanding the structural details of differing inhibitor effectiveness can aid the design of improved mechanism-based beta-lactamase inhibitors.

7929197	Fine tuning the specificity of the periplasmic phosphate transport receptor. Site-directed mutagenesis, ligand binding, and crystallographic studies.	Phosphorous, primarily in the form of phosphate, is a critical nutrient for the life of a cell. We have previously determined the 1.7-A resolution structure of the phosphate-binding protein, an initial receptor for the high-affinity phosphate active transport system or permease in Escherichia coli (Luecke, H., and Quiocho, F.A. (1990) Nature 347, 402-406). This structure is the first to reveal the key role of hydrogen bonding interactions in conferring the high specificity of the permease, a specificity also shared by other phosphate transport systems. Both monobasic and dibasic phosphates are recognized by the phosphate-binding protein with Asp56 playing a key role. Here we report site-directed mutagenesis, ligand binding, and crystallographic studies of the binding protein which show that introduction of one additional Asp by mutagenesis of the Thr141 in the ligand-binding site restricts binding to only the monobasic phosphate.

12499545	The refined atomic structure of carbonic anhydrase II at 1.05 A resolution: implications of chemical rescue of proton transfer.	Using synchrotron radiation and a CCD detector, X-ray data have been collected at 100 K for the His64Ala mutant of human carbonic anhydrase II complexed with 4-methylimidazole (4-MI) to a maximal 1.05 A resolution, allowing full anisotropic least-squares refinement. The refined model has a conventional R factor of 15.7% for all reflections. The C(alpha) coordinates of the model presented here have an r.m.s. deviation of 0.10 A relative to the previously determined structure at 1.6 A resolution. Several amino-acid residues (six of the 255 observed) have been identified with multiple rotamer side-chain conformations. C, N and O atoms can be differentiated with selective electron-density map contouring. The estimated standard deviations for all main-chain non-H atom bond lengths and angles are 0.013 and 0.030 A, respectively, based on unrestrained full-matrix least-squares refinement. This structure gives detailed information about the tetrahedrally arranged zinc ion coordinated by three histidine N atoms (His94 N(epsilon 2), His96 N(epsilon2) and His119 N(delta1)) and a water/hydroxide, the multiple binding sites of the proton chemical rescue molecule 4-MI and the solvent networks linking the zinc-bound water/hydroxide and 4-MI molecules. This structure presents the highest resolution structure of a carbonic anhydrase isozyme so far determined and adds to the understanding of proton-transfer processes.

15981999	Structural consequences of the inhibitor-resistant Ser130Gly substitution in TEM beta-lactamase.	Beta-lactamase confers resistance to penicillin-like antibiotics by hydrolyzing their beta-lactam bond. To combat these enzymes, inhibitors covalently cross-linking the hydrolytic Ser70 to Ser130 were introduced. In turn, mutant beta-lactamases have emerged with decreased susceptibility to these mechanism-based inhibitors. Substituting Ser130 with glycine in the inhibitor-resistant TEM (IRT) mutant TEM-76 (S130G) prevents the irreversible cross-linking step. Since the completely conserved Ser130 is thought to transfer a proton important for catalysis, its substitution might be hypothesized to result in a nonfunctional enzyme; this is clearly not the case. To investigate how TEM-76 remains active, its structure was determined by X-ray crystallography to 1.40 A resolution. A new water molecule (Wat1023) is observed in the active site, with two configurations located 1.1 and 1.3 A from the missing Ser130 Ogamma; this water molecule likely replaces the Ser130 side-chain hydroxyl in substrate hydrolysis. Intriguingly, this same water molecule is seen in the IRT TEM-32 (M69I/M182T), where Ser130 has moved significantly. TEM-76 shares other structural similarities with various IRTs; like TEM-30 (R244S) and TEM-84 (N276D), the water molecule activating clavulanate for cross-linking (Wat1614) is disordered (in TEM-30 it is actually absent). As expected, TEM-76 has decreased kinetic activity, likely due to the replacement of the Ser130 side-chain hydroxyl with a water molecule. In contrast to the recently determined structure of the S130G mutant in the related SHV-1 beta-lactamase, in TEM-76 the key hydrolytic water (Wat1561) is still present. The conservation of similar accommodations among IRT mutants suggests that resistance arises from common mechanisms, despite the disparate locations of the various substitutions.

15274923	Chromophore conformation and the evolution of tertiary structural changes in photoactive yellow protein.	We use time-resolved crystallography to observe the structural progression of a bacterial blue light photoreceptor throughout its photocycle. Data were collected from 10 ns to 100 ms after photoactivation of the E46Q mutant of photoactive yellow protein. Refinement of transient chromophore conformations shows that the spectroscopically distinct intermediates are formed via progressive disruption of the hydrogen bond network to the chromophore. Although structural change occurs within a few nanoseconds on and around the chromophore, it takes milliseconds for a distinct pattern of tertiary structural change to fully progress through the entire molecule, thus generating the putative signaling state. Remarkably, the coupling between the chromophore conformation and the tertiary structure of this small protein is not tight: there are leads and lags between changes in the conformation of the chromophore and the protein tertiary structure.

11080630	Structural basis for the resilience of efavirenz (DMP-266) to drug resistance mutations in HIV-1 reverse transcriptase.	BACKGROUND: Efavirenz is a second-generation non-nucleoside inhibitor of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) that has recently been approved for use against HIV-1 infection. Compared with first-generation drugs such as nevirapine, efavirenz shows greater resilience to drug resistance mutations within HIV-1 RT. In order to understand the basis for this resilience at the molecular level and to help the design of further-improved anti-AIDS drugs, we have determined crystal structures of efavirenz and nevirapine with wild-type RT and the clinically important K103N mutant. RESULTS: The relatively compact efavirenz molecule binds, as expected, within the non-nucleoside inhibitor binding pocket of RT. There are significant rearrangements of the drug binding site within the mutant RT compared with the wild-type enzyme. These changes, which lead to the repositioning of the inhibitor, are not seen in the interaction with the first-generation drug nevirapine. CONCLUSIONS: The repositioning of efavirenz within the drug binding pocket of the mutant RT, together with conformational rearrangements in the protein, could represent a general mechanism whereby certain second-generation non-nucleoside inhibitors are able to reduce the effect of drug-resistance mutations on binding potency.

2061330	The crystal structure of a mutant human lysozyme C77/95A with increased secretion efficiency in yeast.	The three-dimensional structure of a mutant human lysozyme, C77/95A, in which residues Cys77 and Cys95 were replaced by alanine, was determined at 1.8-A resolution by x-ray crystallography. The properties of this mutant protein have been well characterized with respect to its thermal stability and secretion efficiency in a yeast expression system. The overall three-dimensional structure of C77/95A was found to be essentially identical to that of the wild-type human lysozyme, although the coordinates were shifted by more than 0.5 A and the thermal factors of the main-chain atoms were increased in the vicinity of residue 77. The reduction in thermal stability of this mutant has been previously explained by an increase in entropy of the unfolded state. In addition, a packing defect (cavity) produced by the removal of the disulfide bond was detected in the three-dimensional structure of C77/95A. This cavity can also be a reason why the stability of the protein is reduced because the free energy of the folded state could be expected to increase. The increased secretion efficiency cannot be due mainly to the three-dimensional structure, but may possibly be related to some event in the pathway of protein secretion. One of the possibilities might involve molecular flexibilities in the secondary or tertiary structure for lack of one of the disulfide bonds.

9499107	Mutations in a conserved residue in the influenza virus neuraminidase active site decreases sensitivity to Neu5Ac2en-derived inhibitors.	The influenza virus neuraminidase (NA)-specific inhibitor zanamivir (4-guanidino-Neu5Ac2en) is effective in humans when administered topically within the respiratory tract. The search for compounds with altered pharmacological properties has led to the identification of a novel series of influenza virus NA inhibitors in which the triol group of zanamivir has been replaced by a hydrophobic group linked by a carboxamide at the 6 position (6-carboxamide). NWS/G70C variants generated in vitro, with decreased sensitivity to 6-carboxamide, contained hemagglutinin (HA) and/or NA mutations. HA mutants bound with a decreased efficiency to the cellular receptor and were cross-resistant to all the NA inhibitors tested. The NA mutation, an Arg-to-Lys mutation, was in a previously conserved site, Arg292, which forms part of a triarginyl cluster in the catalytic site. In enzyme assays, the NA was equally resistant to zanamivir and 4-amino-Neu5Ac2en but showed greater resistance to 6-carboxamide and was most resistant to a new carbocyclic NA inhibitor, GS4071, which also has a hydrophobic side chain at the 6 position. Consistent with enzyme assays, the lowest resistance in cell culture was seen to zanamivir, more resistance was seen to 6-carboxamide, and the greatest resistance was seen to GS4071. Substrate binding and enzyme activity were also decreased in the mutant, and consequently, virus replication in both plaque assays and liquid culture was compromised. Altered binding of the hydrophobic side chain at the 6 position or the triol group could account for the decreased binding of both the NA inhibitors and substrate.

16157350	Oligosaccharide preferences of beta1,4-galactosyltransferase-I: crystal structures of Met340His mutant of human beta1,4-galactosyltransferase-I with a pentasaccharide and trisaccharides of the N-glycan moiety.	beta-1,4-Galactosyltransferase-I (beta4Gal-T1) transfers galactose from UDP-galactose to N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) residues of the branched N-linked oligosaccharide chains of glycoproteins. In an N-linked biantennary oligosaccharide chain, one antenna is attached to the 3-hydroxyl-(1,3-arm), and the other to the 6-hydroxyl-(1,6-arm) group of mannose, which is beta-1,4-linked to an N-linked chitobiose, attached to the aspargine residue of a protein. For a better understanding of the branch specificity of beta4Gal-T1 towards the GlcNAc residues of N-glycans, we have carried out kinetic and crystallographic studies with the wild-type human beta4Gal-T1 (h-beta4Gal-T1) and the mutant Met340His-beta4Gal-T1 (h-M340H-beta4Gal-T1) in complex with a GlcNAc-containing pentasaccharide and several GlcNAc-containing trisaccharides present in N-glycans. The oligosaccharides used were: pentasaccharide GlcNAcbeta1,2-Manalpha1,6 (GlcNAcbeta1,2-Manalpha1,3)Man; the 1,6-arm trisaccharide, GlcNAcbeta1,2-Manalpha1,6-Manbeta-OR (1,2-1,6-arm); the 1,3-arm trisaccharides, GlcNAcbeta1,2-Manalpha1,3-Manbeta-OR (1,2-1,3-arm) and GlcNAcbeta1,4-Manalpha1,3-Manbeta-OR (1,4-1,3-arm); and the trisaccharide GlcNAcbeta1,4-GlcNAcbeta1,4-GlcNAc (chitotriose). With the wild-type h-beta4Gal-T1, the K(m) of 1,2-1,6-arm is approximately tenfold lower than for 1,2-1,3-arm and 1,4-1,3-arm, and 22-fold lower than for chitotriose. Crystal structures of h-M340H-beta4Gal-T1 in complex with the pentasaccharide and various trisaccharides at 1.9-2.0A resolution showed that beta4Gal-T1 is in a closed conformation with the oligosaccharide bound to the enzyme, and the 1,2-1,6-arm trisaccharide makes the maximum number of interactions with the enzyme, which is in concurrence with the lowest K(m) for the trisaccharide. Present studies suggest that beta4Gal-T1 interacts preferentially with the 1,2-1,6-arm trisaccharide rather than with the 1,2-1,3-arm or 1,4-1,3-arm of a bi- or tri-antennary oligosaccharide chain of N-glycan.

8555209	Contribution of cutinase serine 42 side chain to the stabilization of the oxyanion transition state.	Cutinase from the fungus Fusarium solani pisi is a lipolytic enzyme able to hydrolyze both aggregated and soluble substrates. It therefore provides a powerful tool for probing the mechanisms underlying lipid hydrolysis. Lipolytic enzymes have a catalytic machinery similar to those present in serine proteinases. It is characterized by the triad Ser, His, and Asp (Glu) residues, by an oxyanion binding site that stabilizes the transition state via hydrogen bonds with two main chain amide groups, and possibly by other determinants. It has been suggested on the basis of a covalently bond inhibitor that the cutinase oxyanion hole may consist not only of two main chain amide groups but also of the Ser42 O gamma side chain. Among the esterases and the serine and the cysteine proteases, only Streptomyces scabies esterase, subtilisin, and papain, respectively, have a side chain residue which is involved in the oxyanion hole formation. The position of the cutinase Ser42 side chain is structurally conserved in Rhizomucor miehei lipase with Ser82 O gamma, in Rhizopus delemar lipase with Thr83 O gamma 1, and in Candida antartica B lipase with Thr40 O gamma 1. To evaluate the increase in the tetrahedral intermediate stability provided by Ser42 O gamma, we mutated Ser42 into Ala. Furthermore, since the proper orientation of Ser42 O gamma is directed by Asn84, we mutated Asn84 into Ala, Leu, Asp, and Trp, respectively, to investigate the contribution of this indirect interaction to the stabilization of the oxyanion hole. The S42A mutation resulted in a drastic decrease in the activity (450-fold) without significantly perturbing the three-dimensional structure. The N84A and N84L mutations had milder kinetic effects and did not disrupt the structure of the active site, whereas the N84W and N84D mutations abolished the enzymatic activity due to drastic steric and electrostatic effects, respectively.

15049684	Crystal structures of an intrinsically active cholera toxin mutant yield insight into the toxin activation mechanism.	Cholera toxin (CT) is a heterohexameric bacterial protein toxin belonging to a larger family of A/B ADP-ribosylating toxins. Each of these toxins undergoes limited proteolysis and/or disulfide bond reduction to form the enzymatically active toxic fragment. Nicking and reduction render both CT and the closely related heat-labile enterotoxin from Escherichia coli (LT) unstable in solution, thus far preventing a full structural understanding of the conformational changes resulting from toxin activation. We present the first structural glimpse of an active CT in structures from three crystal forms of a single-site A-subunit CT variant, Y30S, which requires no activational modifications for full activity. We also redetermined the structure of the wild-type, proenzyme CT from two crystal forms, both of which exhibit (i) better geometry and (ii) a different A2 "tail" conformation than the previously determined structure [Zhang et al. (1995) J. Mol. Biol. 251, 563-573]. Differences between wild-type CT and active CTY30S are observed in A-subunit loop regions that had been previously implicated in activation by analysis of the structure of an LT A-subunit R7K variant [van den Akker et al. (1995) Biochemistry 34, 10996-11004]. The 25-36 activation loop is disordered in CTY30S, while the 47-56 active site loop displays varying degrees of order in the three CTY30S structures, suggesting that disorder in the activation loop predisposes the active site loop to a greater degree of flexibility than that found in unactivated wild-type CT. On the basis of these six new views of the CT holotoxin, we propose a model for how the activational modifications experienced by wild-type CT are communicated to the active site.

10336378	Structural basis for the activity of two muconate cycloisomerase variants toward substituted muconates.	We have refined to 2.3 A resolution two muconate cycloisomerase (MCIase) variant structures, F329I and I54V, that differ from each other and from wild-type in their activity toward cis,cis-muconate (CCM) and substituted CCMs. The working and free R-factors for F329I are 17.4/21.6% and for I54V, 17.6/22.3% with good stereochemistry. Except for the mutated residue, there are no significant changes in structure. To understand the differences in enzymatic properties we docked substituted CCMs and CCM into the active sites of the variants and wild type. The extra space the mutations create appears to account for most of the enzymatic differences. The lack of other structural changes explains why, although structurally equivalent changes occur in chloromuconate cycloisomerase (CMCIase), the changes in themselves do not convert a MCIase into a dehalogenating CMCIase. Reanalysis of the CMCIase structure revealed only one general acid/base, K169. The structural implication is that, in 2-chloro-CCM conversion by CMCIase, the lactone ring of 5-chloromuconolactone rotates before dehalogenation to bring the acidic C4 proton next to K169. Therefore, K169 alone performs both required protonation and deprotonation steps, the first at C5 as in MCIase, and the second, after ring rotation, at C4. This distinguishes CMCIase from alpha/beta barrel isomerases and racemases, which use two different bases.

1731252	A cavity-containing mutant of T4 lysozyme is stabilized by buried benzene.	The hydrophobic cores of proteins are generally well packed, with few cavities. Mutations in which a bulky buried residue such as leucine or phenylalanine is replaced with a small residue such as alanine can create cavities in the core of a protein (our unpublished results). The sizes and shapes of such cavities can vary substantially depending on factors such as local geometry, whether or not a cavity already exists at the site of substitution, and the degree to which the protein structure relaxes to occupy the space vacated by the substituted residue. We show by crystallographic and thermodynamic analysis that the cavity created by the replacement Leu 99----Ala in T4 lysozyme is large enough to bind benzene and that ligand binding increases the melting temperature of the protein by 6.0 degrees C at pH 3.0. Benzene does not, however, bind to the cavity created by the Phe 153----Ala replacement. The results show that cavities can be engineered in proteins and suggest that such cavities might be tailored to bind specific ligands. The binding of benzene at an internal site 7 A from the molecular surface also illustrates the dynamic nature of proteins, even in crystals.

15779910	Effect of pH on the active site of an Arg121Cys mutant of the metallo-beta-lactamase from Bacillus cereus: implications for the enzyme mechanism.	The zinc-dependent metallo-beta-lactamases are a group of bacterial enzymes that pose a threat to the future efficacy of present-day antibiotics. Their mechanism is poorly understood, and there are no clinically useful inhibitors. While most members of the group contain two tightly bound zinc ions in their active sites, the Bacillus cereus enzyme has a much lower affinity for its second zinc (Zn2), thought to be due to the presence of Arg121 immediately beneath the floor of the active site (cf. Cys/Ser/His121 in the bizinc enzymes). Crystal structures of the Arg121Cys mutant of the B. cereus 569/H/9 enzyme were solved at pH 7.0, 5.0, and 4.5, each in the presence of either 20 microM or 20 mM Zn(2+) to generate the mono- and bizinc forms, respectively. Surprisingly, the structure of the active site was unaffected by the mutation; a network of ordered water molecules replaced the interactions made by the arginine side chain, and the occupancy of Zn2 appeared minimally changed. As the pH was lowered, Zn2 moved away from one of its ligands, Asp120, but was "tracked" by two others, Cys221 and His263. Furthermore, the hydroxide ion (and proposed nucleophile for beta-lactam hydrolysis) was bound to Zn1 at pH 5 and above but absent at pH 4.5. This provides experimental evidence for an earlier proposed mechanism in which protonation of Asp120 and the Zn1-bound hydroxide are the two events that lead to the loss of activity at low pH.

16300397	Dissecting the roles of a strictly conserved tyrosine in substrate recognition and catalysis by pseudouridine 55 synthase.	Sequence alignment of the TruA, TruB, RsuA, and RluA families of pseudouridine synthases (PsiS) identifies a strictly conserved aspartic acid, which has been shown to be the critical nucleophile for the PsiS-catalyzed formation of pseudouridine (Psi). However, superposition of the representative structures from these four families of enzymes identifies two additional amino acids, a lysine or an arginine (K/R) and a tyrosine (Y), from a K/RxY motif that are structurally conserved in the active site. We have created a series of Thermotoga maritima and Escherichia coli pseudouridine 55 synthase (Psi55S) mutants in which the conserved Y is mutated to other amino acids. A new crystal structure of the T. maritima Psi55S Y67F mutant in complex with a 5FU-RNA at 2.4 A resolution revealed formation of 5-fluoro-6-hydroxypseudouridine (5FhPsi), the same product previously seen in wild-type Psi55S-5FU-RNA complex structures. HPLC analysis confirmed efficient formation of 5FhPsi by both Psi55S Y67F and Y67L mutants but to a much lesser extent by the Y67A mutant when 5FU-RNA substrate was used. However, both HPLC analysis and a tritium release assay indicated that these mutants had no detectable enzymatic activity when the natural RNA substrate was used. The combined structural and mutational studies lead us to propose that the side chain of the conserved tyrosine in these four families of PsiS plays a dual role within the active site, maintaining the structural integrity of the active site through its hydrophobic phenyl ring and acting as a general base through its OH group for the proton abstraction required in the last step of PsiS-catalyzed formation of Psi.

9698564	A pH-dependent stabilization of an active site loop observed from low and high pH crystal structures of mutant monomeric glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase at 1.8 to 1.9 A.	A mutation in the dimer interface of Escherichia coli glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase (GarTfase) disrupts the observed pH-dependent association of the wild-type enzyme, but has no observable effect on the enzyme activity. Here, we assess whether a pH effect on the enzyme's conformation is sufficient by itself to explain the pH-dependence of the GarTfase reaction. A pH-dependent conformational change is observed between two high-resolution crystal structures of the Glu70Ala mutant GarTfase at pH 3.5 (1.8 A) and 7.5 (1.9 A). Residues 110 to 131 in GarTfase undergo a transformation from a disordered loop at pH 3.5, where the enzyme is inactive, to an ordered loop-helix structure at pH 7.5, where the enzyme is active. The ordering of this flexible loop-helix has a direct effect on catalytic residues in the active site, binding of the folate cofactor and shielding of the active site from solvent. A main-chain carbonyl oxygen atom from Tyr115 in the ordered loop forms a hydrogen bond with His108, and thereby provides electronic and structural stabilization of this key active site residue. Kinetic data indicate that the pKa of His108 is in fact raised to 9. 2. The loop movement can be correlated with elevation of the His pKa, but with further stabilization, probably from Asp144, after the binding of folate cofactor. Leu118, also in the loop, becomes positioned near the p-amino benzoic acid binding site, providing additional hydrophobic interactions with the cofactor 10-formyl tetrahydrofolate. Thus, the pH-dependence of the enzyme activity appears to arise from local active site rearrangements and not from differences due to monomer-dimer association.

15528205	Roles of distal Asp in heme oxygenase from Corynebacterium diphtheriae, HmuO: A water-driven oxygen activation mechanism.	Heme oxygenases found in mammals, plants, and bacteria catalyze degradation of heme using the same mechanism. Roles of distal Asp (Asp-136) residue in HmuO, a heme oxygenase of Corynebacterium diphtheriae, have been investigated by site-directed mutagenesis, enzyme kinetics, resonance Raman spectroscopy, and x-ray crystallography. Replacements of the Asp-136 by Ala and Phe resulted in reduced heme degradation activity due to the formation of ferryl heme, showing that the distal Asp is critical in HmuO heme oxygenase activity. D136N HmuO catalyzed heme degradation at a similar efficiency to wild type and D136E HmuO, implying that the carboxylate moiety is not required for the heme catabolism by HmuO. Resonance Raman results suggest that the inactive ferryl heme formation in the HmuO mutants is induced by disruption of the interaction between a reactive Fe-OOH species and an adjacent distal pocket water molecule. Crystal structural analysis of the HmuO mutants confirms partial disappearance of this nearby water in D136A HmuO. Our results provide the first experimental evidence for the catalytic importance of the nearby water molecule that can be universally critical in heme oxygenase catalysis and propose that the distal Asp helps in positioning the key water molecule at a position suitable for efficient activation of the Fe-OOH species.

10430876	Structural basis of the conversion of T4 lysozyme into a transglycosidase by reengineering the active site.	In contrast to hen egg-white lysozyme, which retains the beta-configuration of the substrate in the product, T4 lysozyme (T4L) is an inverting glycosidase. The substitution Thr-26 --> His, however, converts T4L from an inverting to a retaining enzyme. It is shown here that the Thr-26 --> His mutant is also a transglycosidase. Indeed, the transglycosylation reaction can be more effective than hydrolysis. In contrast, wild-type T4L has no detectable transglycosidase activity. The results support the prior hypothesis that catalysis by the Thr-26 --> His mutant proceeds via a covalent intermediate. Further mutations (Glu-11 --> His, Asp-20 --> Cys) of the T26H mutant lysozyme indicate that the catalytic mechanism of this mutant requires Glu-11 as a general acid but Asp-20 is not essential. The results help provide an overall rationalization for the activity of glycosidases, in which a highly conserved acid group (Glu-11 in T4L, Glu-35 in hen egg-white lysozyme) on the beta-side of the substrate acts as a proton donor, whereas alterations in the placement and chemical identity of residues on the alpha-side of the substrate can lead to catalysis with or without retention of the configuration, to transglycosidase activity, or to the formation of a stable enzyme-substrate adduct.

8142383	Small molecule binding to an artificially created cavity at the active site of cytochrome c peroxidase.	In the oxidized "ES" state of cytochrome c peroxidase, Trp-191 is reversibly oxidized to a stable cation free radical by the hypervalent heme. To explore the potential for engineering a binding site for heterocyclic compounds at this site, the mutant W191G was constructed. Two independent crystal structures of W191G at 2.1- and 2.3-A resolution show that W191G contains a well-defined, approximately 180-A3 cavity at the Trp-191 site. The cavity is occupied by five ordered water molecules which participate in an extensive hydrogen-bonding network with each other, with polar main-chain atoms, and with the carboxylate of Asp-235. After a number of heterocyclic compounds were screened, evidence was obtained that substituted imidazoles bind to the cavity of W191G. Titration of W191G with imidazole resulted in a perturbation of the Soret absorption band that was not observed for W191H, W191F, or the native enzyme. The dissociation constants for binding of benzimidazole, imidazole, 2-ethylimidazole, 1-methylimidazole, 2-methylimidazole, and 1,2-dimethylimidazole to W191G were respectively 2.58, 0.70, 0.36, 0.057, 0.047, and 0.027 mM at pH 6.0. The highest binding affinity was exhibited by 1,2-dimethylimidazole, indicating that steric interactions and the efficiency of filling the cavity are important determinants for specificity. The Kd for imidazole binding increased from 0.7 mM at pH 6 to 3.0 mM at pH 8 and could be fit to a single proton ionization curve with a pKa of 7.4, demonstrating the preferential binding by the imidazolium ion (pKa = 7.3). The binding of a number of substituted imidazoles to the cavity of W191G was verified by X-ray crystallographic analysis. The most clearly defined density was observed for W191G crystals soaked in 1 mM 1,2-dimethylimidazole and was consistent with an oriented occupation in which the unsubstituted nitrogen forms a hydrogen bond or ion pair interaction with Asp-235. Thus, enhanced binding of positively charged molecules may be the result of interactions with this carboxylate. An analogous interaction may stabilize the developing positive charge on the Trp-191 radical of the wild-type enzyme. While the oxidation of imidazoles by the ferryl intermediate of W191G was neither expected nor observed, this study has defined the structural determinants for small molecule binding to an artificially created cavity near a heme center which is capable of generating oxidized species at a potential of over 1 V, and these results will guide future attempts for novel substrate oxidation by CCP.

15610023	Toward the insulin-IGF-I intermediate structures: functional and structural properties of the [TyrB25NMePheB26] insulin mutant.	The origins of differentiation of insulin from insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) are still unknown. To address the problem of a structural and biological switch from the mostly metabolic hormonal activity of insulin to the predominant growth factor activities of IGF-I, an insulin analogue with IGF-I-like structural features has been synthesized. Insulin residues Phe(B25) and Tyr(B26) have been swapped with the IGF-I-like Tyr(24) and Phe(25) sequence with a simultaneous methylation of the peptide nitrogen of residue Phe(B26). These modifications were expected to introduce a substantial kink in the main chain, as observed at residue Phe(25) in the IGF-I crystal structure. These alterations should provide insight into the structural origins of insulin-IGF-I structural and functional divergence. The [Tyr(B25)NMePhe(B26)] mutant has been characterized, and its crystal structure has been determined. Surprisingly, all of these changes are well accommodated within an insulin R6 hexamer. Only one molecule of each dimer in the hexamer responds to the structural alterations, the other remaining very similar to wild-type insulin. All alterations, modest in their scale, cumulate in the C-terminal part of the B-chain (residues B23-B30), which moves toward the core of the insulin molecule and is associated with a significant shift of the A1 helix toward the C-terminus of the B-chain. These changes do not produce the expected bend of the main chain, but the fold of the mutant does reflect some structural characteristics of IGF-1, and in addition establishes the CO(A19)-NH(B25) hydrogen bond, which is normally characteristic of T-state insulin.

12904027	Structural aspects for evolution of beta-lactamases from penicillin-binding proteins.	Penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs), biosynthetic enzymes of bacterial cell wall assembly, and beta-lactamases, resistance enzymes to beta-lactam antibiotics, are related to each other from an evolutionary point of view. Massova and Mobashery (Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 1998, 42, 1-17) have proposed that for beta-lactamases to have become effective at their function as antibiotic resistance enzymes, they would have had to undergo structure alterations such that they would not interact with the peptidoglycan, which is the substrate for PBPs. A cephalosporin analogue, 7beta-[N-Acetyl-L-alanyl-gamma-D-glutamyl-L-lysine]-3-acetoxymethyl-3-cephem-carboxylic acid (compound 6), was conceived and synthesized to test this notion. The X-ray structure of the complex of this cephalosporin bound to the active site of the deacylation-deficient Q120L/Y150E variant of the class C AmpC beta-lactamase from Escherichia coli was solved at 1.71 A resolution. This complex revealed that the surface for interaction with the strand of peptidoglycan that acylates the active site, which is present in PBPs, is absent in the -lactamase active site. Furthermore, insertion of a peptide in the beta-lactamase active site at a location where the second strand of peptidoglycan in some PBPs binds has effectively abolished the possibility for such interaction with the beta-lactamase. A 2.6 ns dynamics simulation was carried out for the complex, which revealed that the peptidoglycan surrogate (i.e., the active-site-bound ligand) undergoes substantial motion and is not stabilized for binding within the active site. These factors taken together disclose the set of structure modifications in the antibiotic resistance enzyme that prevent it from interacting with the peptidoglycan, en route to achieving catalytic proficiency for their intended function.

12501175	The crystal structure of the H48Q active site mutant of human group IIA secreted phospholipase A2 at 1.5 A resolution provides an insight into the catalytic mechanism.	The human group IIA secreted PLA(2) is a 14 kDa calcium-dependent extracellular enzyme that has been characterized as an acute phase protein with important antimicrobial activity and has been implicated in signal transduction. The selective binding of this enzyme to the phospholipid substrate interface plays a crucial role in its physiological function. To study interfacial binding in the absence of catalysis, one strategy is to produce structurally intact but catalytically inactive mutants. The active site mutants H48Q, H48N, and H48A had been prepared for the secreted PLA(2)s from bovine pancreas and bee venom and retained minimal catalytic activity while the H48Q mutant showed the maximum structural integrity. Preparation of the mutant H48Q of the human group IIA enzyme unexpectedly produced an enzyme that retained significant (2-4%) catalytic activity that was contrary to expectations in view of the accepted catalytic mechanism. In this paper it is established that the high residual activity of the H48Q mutant is genuine, not due to contamination, and can be seen under a variety of assay conditions including assays in the presence of Co(2+) and Ni(2+) in place of Ca(2+). The crystallization of the H48Q mutant, yielding diffraction data to a resolution of 1.5 A, allowed a comparison with the corresponding recombinant wild-type enzyme (N1A) that was also crystallized. This comparison revealed that all of the important features of the catalytic machinery were in place and the two structures were virtually superimposable. In particular, the catalytic calcium ion occupied an identical position in the active site of the two proteins, and the catalytic water molecule (w6) was clearly resolved in the H48Q mutant. We propose that a variation of the calcium-coordinated oxyanion ("two water") mechanism involving hydrogen bonding rather than the anticipated full proton transfer to the histidine will best explain the ability of an active site glutamine to allow significant catalytic activity.

11781092	Two glutamate residues, Glu 208 alpha and Glu 197 beta, are crucial for phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of the active-site histidine residue in succinyl-CoA synthetase.	Succinyl-CoA synthetase catalyzes the reversible reaction succinyl-CoA + NDP + P(i) <--> succinate + CoA + NTP (N denoting adenosine or guanosine). The enzyme consists of two different subunits, designated alpha and beta. During the reaction, a histidine residue of the alpha-subunit is transiently phosphorylated. This histidine residue interacts with Glu 208 alpha at site I in the structures of phosphorylated and dephosphorylated Escherichia coli SCS. We postulated that Glu 197 beta, a residue in the nucleotide-binding domain, would provide similar stabilization of the histidine residue during the actual phosphorylation/dephosphorylation by nucleotide at site II. In this work, these two glutamate residues have been mutated individually to aspartate or glutamine. Glu 197 beta has been additionally mutated to alanine. The mutant proteins were tested for their ability to be phosphorylated in the forward or reverse direction. The aspartate mutant proteins can be phosphorylated in either direction, while the E208 alpha Q mutant protein can only be phosphorylated by NTP, and the E197 beta Q mutant protein can only be phosphorylated by succinyl-CoA and P(i). These results demonstrate that the length of the side chain at these positions is not critical, but that the charge is. Most significantly, the E197 beta A mutant protein could not be phosphorylated in either direction. Its crystal structure shows large differences from the wild-type enzyme in the conformation of two residues of the alpha-subunit, Cys 123 alpha-Pro 124 alpha. We postulate that in this conformation, the protein cannot productively bind succinyl-CoA for phosphorylation via succinyl-CoA and P(i).

10737931	Plasticity and steric strain in a parallel beta-helix: rational mutations in the P22 tailspike protein.	By means of genetic screens, a great number of mutations that affect the folding and stability of the tailspike protein from Salmonella phage P22 have been identified. Temperature-sensitive folding (tsf) mutations decrease folding yields at high temperature, but hardly affect thermal stability of the native trimeric structure when assembled at low temperature. Global suppressor (su) mutations mitigate this phenotype. Virtually all of these mutations are located in the central domain of tailspike, a large parallel beta-helix. We modified tailspike by rational single amino acid replacements at three sites in order to investigate the influence of mutations of two types: (1) mutations expected to cause a tsf phenotype by increasing the side-chain volume of a core residue, and (2) mutations in a similar structural context as two of the four known su mutations, which have been suggested to stabilize folding intermediates and the native structure by the release of backbone strain, an effect well known for residues that are primarily evolved for function and not for stability or folding of the protein. Analysis of folding yields, refolding kinetics and thermal denaturation kinetics in vitro show that the tsf phenotype can indeed be produced rationally by increasing the volume of side chains in the beta-helix core. The high-resolution crystal structure of mutant T326F proves that structural rearrangements only take place in the remarkably plastic lumen of the beta-helix, leaving the arrangement of the hydrogen-bonded backbone and thus the surface of the protein unaffected. This supports the notion that changes in the stability of an intermediate, in which the beta-helix domain is largely formed, are the essential mechanism by which tsf mutations affect tailspike folding. A rational design of su mutants, on the other hand, appears to be more difficult. The exchange of two residues in the active site expected to lead to a drastic release of steric strain neither enhanced the folding properties nor the stability of tailspike. Apparently, side-chain interactions in these cases overcompensate for backbone strain, illustrating the extreme optimization of the tailspike protein for conformational stability. The result exemplifies the view arising from the statistical analysis of the distribution of backbone dihedral angles in known three-dimensional protein structures that the adoption of straight phi/psi angles other than the most favorable ones is often caused by side-chain interactions. Proteins 2000;39:89-101.

12962504	Pronounced conversion of the metal-specific activity of superoxide dismutase from Porphyromonas gingivalis by the mutation of a single amino acid (Gly155Thr) located apart from the active site.	Glycine 155, which is located approximately 10 A from the active metal sites, is mostly conserved in aligned amino acid sequences of manganese-specific superoxide dismutases (Mn-SODs) and cambialistic SOD (showing the same activity with Fe and Mn) from Porphyromonas gingivalis, but is substituted for threonine in most Fe-SODs. Since Thr155 is located between Trp123 and Trp125, and Trp123 is one member of the metal-surrounding aromatic amino acids, there is a possibility that the conversion of this amino acid may cause a conversion of the metal-specific activity of cambialistic P. gingivalis SOD. To clarify this possibility, we have prepared a mutant of the P. gingivalis SOD with conversion of Gly155 to Thr. The ratios of the specific activities of Fe- to Mn-reconstituted enzyme, which are measured by the xanthine oxidase/cytochrome c method, increased from 0.6 in the wild-type to 11.2 in the mutant SODs, indicating the conversion of the metal-specific activity of the enzyme from a cambialistic type to an Fe-specific type. The visible absorption spectra of the Fe- and Mn-reconstituted mutant SODs closely resembled those of Fe-specific SOD. Furthermore, the EPR spectra of the Fe- and Mn-reconstituted mutant SODs also closely resembled those of Fe-specific SOD. Three-dimensional structures of the Fe-reconstituted wild-type SOD and Mn-reconstituted mutant SOD have been determined at 1.6 A resolution. Both structures have identical conformations, orientations of residues involved in metal binding, and hydrogen bond networks, while the side chain of Trp123 is moved further toward the metal-binding site than in wild-type SOD. A possible contribution of the structural differences to the conversion of the metal-specific activity through rearrangement of the hydrogen bond network among Trp123, Gln70, Tyr35, and the metal-coordinated solvent is discussed.

11018727	Dynamics of a mobile loop at the active site of Escherichia coli asparaginase.	Asparaginase II from Escherichia coli is well-known member of the bacterial class II amidohydrolases. Enzymes of this family utilize a peculiar catalytic mechanism in which a pair of threonine residues play pivotal roles. Another common feature is a mobile surface loop that closes over the active site when the substrates is bound. We have studied the motion of the loop by stopped-flow experiments using the fluorescence of tryptophan residues as the spectroscopic probe. With wild-type enzyme the fluorescence of the only tryptophan, W66, was monitored. Here asparagine induced a rapid closure of the loop. The rate constants of the process (100-150 s(-1) at 4 degrees C) were considerably higher than those of the rate-limiting catalytic step. A more selective spectroscopic probe was generated by replacing W66 with tyrosine and Y25, a component of the loop, with tryptophan. In the resulting enzyme variant, k(cat) and the rate of loop movement were reduced by factors of 10(2) and >10(3), respectively, while substrate binding was unaffected. This indicates that the presence of tyrosine in position 25 is essential for both loop closure and catalysis. Numerical simulations of the observed transients are consistent with a model where loop closure is an absolute prerequisite for substrate turnover.

16060669	Influence of the dimer interface on glutathione transferase structure and dynamics revealed by amide H/D exchange mass spectrometry.	Mammalian glutathione (GSH) transferases are dimeric proteins, many of which share a common hydrophobic interaction motif that is important for dimer stability. In the rGSTM1-1 enzyme this motif involves the side chain of F56, located on the 56 loop of the N-terminal domain, which is intercalated between the alpha4- and alpha5-helices of the C-terminal domain of the opposing subnuit. Disruption of the complementary interactions in this motif by mutation of F56 to serine, arginine, or glutamate is known to have deleterious effects on catalytic efficiency but remarkably different effects on the stability of the dimer [Hornby et al. (2002) Biochemistry 41, 14238-14247]. The structural basis for the behavior of the mutants by amide H/D exchange mass spectrometry is described. A substantial decrease in H/D exchange is observed in the GSH binding domain and in parts of the dimer interface upon substrate binding. The F56S and F56R mutants exhibit enhanced H/D exchange kinetics in the GSH binding domain and at the dimer interface. In contrast, the F56E mutant shows a decrease in the rate and extent of amide H/D exchange at the dimer interface and enhanced exchange kinetics in the GSH binding domain. The results suggest that the F56E mutant has a restructured dimer interface with decreased solvent accessibility and dynamics. Although all of the F56 mutations disrupt the GSH binding site, the effects of the mutations on the structure of the subunit interface and dimer stability are quite distinct.

9174360	Glutathione reductase turned into trypanothione reductase: structural analysis of an engineered change in substrate specificity.	Trypanosoma and Leishmania, pathogens responsible for diseases such as African sleeping sickness, Chagas' heart disease, or Oriental sore, are two of the very few genera that do not use the ubiquitous glutathione/glutathione reductase system to keep a stable cellular redox balance. Instead, they rely on trypanothione and trypanothione reductase to protect them from oxidative stress. Trypanothione reductase (TR) and the corresponding host enzyme, human red blood cell glutathione reductase (GR), belong to the same flavoprotein family. Despite their closely related three-dimensional structures and although their natural substrates share the common structural glutathione core, the two enzymes are mutually exclusive with respect to their disulfide substrates. This makes the parasite enzyme a potential target for antitrypanosomal drug design. While a large body of structural data on GR complexes is available, information on TR-ligand interactions is very limited. When the two amino acid changes Ala34Glu and Arg37Trp are introduced into human GR, the resulting mutant enzyme (GRTR) prefers trypanothione 700-fold over its original substrate, effectively converting a GR into a TR [Bradley, M., B|cheler, U. S., & Walsh, C. T. (1991) Biochemistry 30, 6124-6127]. The crystal structure of GRTR has been determined at 2.3 A resolution and refined to a crystallographic R factor of 20.9%. We have taken advantage of the ease with which ligand complexes can be produced in GR crystals, a property that extends to the isomorphous GRTR crystals, and have produced and analyzed crystals of GRTR complexes with glutathione, trypanothione, glutathionylspermidine and of a true catalytic intermediate, the mixed disulfide between trypanothione and the enzyme. The corresponding molecular structures have been characterized at resolutions between 2.3 and 2.8 A with R factors ranging from 17.1 to 19.7%. The results indicate that the Ala34Glu mutation causes steric hindrance leading to a large displacement of the side chain of Arg347. This movement combined with the change in charge introduced by the mutations modifies the binding cavity, forcing glutathione to adopt a nonproductive binding mode and permitting trypanothione and to a certain degree also the weak substrate glutathionylspermidine to assume a productive mode.

16150974	Hydrogen bonding in human manganese superoxide dismutase containing 3-fluorotyrosine.	Incorporation of 3-fluorotyrosine and site-specific mutagenesis has been utilized with Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and x-ray crystallography to elucidate active-site structure and the role of an active-site residue Tyr34 in human manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD). Calculated harmonic frequencies at the B3LYP/6-31G** level of theory for L-tyrosine and its 3-fluorine substituted analog are compared to experimental frequencies for vibrational mode assignments. Each of the nine tyrosine residues in each of the four subunits of the homotetramer of human MnSOD was replaced with 3-fluorotyrosine. The crystal structures of the unfluorinated and fluorinated wild-type MnSOD are nearly superimposable with the root mean-square deviation for 198 alpha-carbon atoms at 0.3 A. The FTIR data show distinct vibrational modes arising from 3-fluorotyrosine in MnSOD. Comparison of spectra for wild-type and Y34F MnSOD showed that the phenolic hydroxyl of Tyr34 is hydrogen bonded, acting as a proton donor in the active site. Comparison with crystal structures demonstrates that the hydroxyl of Tyr34 is a hydrogen bond donor to an adjacent water molecule; this confirms the participation of Tyr34 in a network of residues and water molecules that extends from the active site to the adjacent subunit.

12962482	Mechanisms of redox-coupled proton transfer in proteins: role of the proximal proline in reactions of the [3Fe-4S] cluster in Azotobacter vinelandii ferredoxin I.	The 7Fe ferredoxin from Azotobacter vinelandii (AvFdI) contains a [3Fe-4S](+/0) cluster that binds a single proton in its reduced level. Although the cluster is buried, and therefore inaccessible to solvent, proton transfer from solvent to the cluster is fast. The kinetics and energetics of the coupled electron-proton transfer reaction at the cluster have been analyzed in detail by protein-film voltammetry, to reveal that proton transfer is mediated by the mobile carboxylate of an adjacent surface residue, aspartate-15, the pK of which is sensitive to the charge on the cluster. This paper examines the role of a nearby proline residue, proline-50, in proton transfer and its coupling to electron transfer. In the P50A and P50G mutants, a water molecule has entered the cluster binding region; it is hydrogen bonded to the backbone amide of residue-50 and to the Asp-15 carboxylate, and it is approximately 4 A from the closest sulfur atom of the cluster. Despite the water molecule linking the cluster more directly to the solvent, proton transfer is not accelerated. A detailed analysis reveals that Asp-15 remains a central part of the mechanism. However, the electrostatic coupling between cluster and carboxylate is almost completely quenched, so that cluster reduction no longer induces such a favorable shift in the carboxylate pK, and protonation of the base no longer induces a significant shift in the pK of the cluster. The electrostatic coupling is crucial for maintaining the efficiency of proton transfer both to and from the cluster, over a range of pH values.

11054294	Structure of a mutant EF-G reveals domain III and possibly the fusidic acid binding site.	The crystal structure of Thermus thermophilus elongation factor G (EF-G) carrying the point mutation His573Ala was determined at a resolution of 2.8 A. The mutant has a more closed structure than that previously reported for wild-type EF-G. This is obtained by a 10 degrees rigid rotation of domains III, IV and V with regard to domains I and II. This rotation results in a displacement of the tip of domain IV by approximately 9 A. The structure of domain III is now fully visible and reveals the double split beta-alpha-beta motif also observed for EF-G domain V and for several ribosomal proteins. A large number of fusidic acid resistant mutations found in domain III have now been possible to locate. Possible locations for the effector loop and a possible binding site for fusidic acid are discussed in relation to some of the fusidic acid resistant mutations.

9918723	The crystal structure of the sevenfold mutant of barley beta-amylase with increased thermostability at 2.5 A resolution.	The three-dimensional structure of the sevenfold mutant of barley beta-amylase (BBA-7s) with increased thermostability was determined by X-ray crystallography. The enzyme was purified as a single component and crystallized by a hanging drop method in the presence of 14 % PEG 6000. The crystals belong to space group P43212 with cell dimensions a=b=72.11 A, c=250.51 A. The diffraction data up to 2.5 A were collected after soaking the crystal in 100 mM maltose with Rsym of 8.6 %. The structure was determined by a molecular replacement method using soybean beta-amylase (SBA) as a search model and refined to an R-factor of 18.7 %. The final model included 500 amino acid residues, 141 water molecules and three glucose residues, which were located at subsites 1-2 and 4 in the active site. The r.m.s. distance of 485 Calpha atoms between BBA-7s and SBA was 0.62 A. Out of the seven mutated amino acids, four (Ser295Ala, Ile297Val, Ser351Pro and Ala376Ser) were substitutions from the common residues with SBA to the thermostable forms. A comparison of the structures of BBA-7s and SBA indicated that the side-chain of Ser376 makes new hydrogen bonds to the main-chain of an adjacent beta-strand, and that the side-chains of Val297 reduce an unfavorable interaction between the side-chains of Ala314. The mutation of Ser295Ala breaks the hydrogen bond between Ser295 OG and Tyr195 OH, which seems to be the reason for the unoccupied glucose residue at subsite 3. The tandem mutations at 350-352 including substitutions to two Pro residues suggested the reduction of main-chain entropy in the unfolded structure of this solvent-exposed protruded loop.

12093271	Role of His505 in the soluble fumarate reductase from Shewanella frigidimarina.	The X-ray structure of the soluble fumarate reductase from Shewanella frigidimarina [Taylor, P., Pealing, S. L., Reid, G. A., Chapman, S. K., and Walkinshaw, M. D. (1999) Nat. Struct. Biol. 6, 1108-1112] clearly shows the presence of an internally bound sodium ion. This sodium ion is coordinated by one solvent water molecule (Wat912) and five backbone carbonyl oxygens from Thr506, Met507, Gly508, Glu534, and Thr536 in what is best described as octahedral geometry (despite the rather long distance from the sodium ion to the backbone oxygen of Met507 (3.1 A)). The water ligand (Wat912) is, in turn, hydrogen bonded to the imidazole ring of His505. This histidine residue is adjacent to His504, a key active-site residue thought to be responsible for the observed pK(a) of the enzyme. Thus, it is possible that His505 may be important in both maintaining the sodium site and in influencing the active site. Here we describe the crystallographic and kinetic characterization of the H505A and H505Y mutant forms of the Shewanella fumarate reductase. The crystal structures of both mutant forms of the enzyme have been solved to 1.8 and 2.0 A resolution, respectively. Both show the presence of the sodium ion in the equivalent position to that found in the wild-type enzyme. The structure of the H505A mutant shows the presence of two water molecules in place of the His505 side-chain which form part of a hydrogen-bonding network with Wat48, a ligand to the sodium ion. The structure of the H505Y mutant shows the hydroxyl group of the tyrosine side-chain hydrogen-bonding to a water molecule which is also a ligand to the sodium ion. Apart from these features, there are no significant structural alterations as a result of either substitution. Both the mutant enzymes are catalytically active but show markedly different pH profiles compared to the wild-type enzyme. At high pH (above 8.5), the wild type and mutant enzymes have very similar activities. However, at low pH (6.0), the H505A mutant enzyme is some 20-fold less active than wild-type. The combined crystallographic and kinetic results suggest that His505 is not essential for sodium binding but does affect catalytic activity perhaps by influencing the pK(a) of the adjacent His504.

7608966	NMR structure of a stable "OB-fold" sub-domain isolated from staphylococcal nuclease.	Similar folds often occur in proteins with dissimilar sequences. The OB-fold forms a part of the structures of at least seven non-homologous proteins that share either oligonucleotide or oligosaccharide binding functions. A 1-103 fragment corresponding to the OB-fold of the 149 amino acid residue staphylococcal nuclease gives NMR spectra characteristic of an unfolded protein, i.e. the wild-type nuclease sequence is insufficient to maintain a stable tertiary structure in the absence of the C-terminal one-third of this single-domain protein. By contrast, the 1-103 fragment of nuclease with the mutations Val66Leu and Gly88Val adopts a stable tertiary structure. The NMR solution structure of this latter fragment is a close variation of the OB-fold found in the X-ray structure of the parent protein. The Val66Leu and Gly88Val mutations appear to stabilize tertiary structure by consolidating the hydrophobic core of the nuclease OB-fold sub-domain. Taken together, these results suggest that recurrent structural motifs such as the OB-fold may in some cases represent vestiges of autonomous folding units that, during evolution, have become integrated into more complex cooperative folding domains.

12902323	Roles of His291-alpha and His146-beta' in the reductive acylation reaction catalyzed by human branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase: refined phosphorylation loop structure in the active site.	We report here that alterations of either His291-alpha or His146-beta' in the active site of human branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase (E1b) impede both the decarboxylation and the reductive acylation reactions catalyzed by E1b as well as the binding of cofactor thiamin diphosphate (ThDP). In a refined human E1b active-site structure, His291-alpha, which aligns with His407 in Escherichia coli pyruvate dehydrogenase and His263 in yeast transketolase, is on a largely ordered phosphorylation loop. The imidazole ring of His291-alpha in E1b coordinates to the terminal phosphate oxygen atoms of bound ThDP. The N3 atom of wild-type His146-beta', which can be protonated, binds a water molecule and points toward the aminopyrimidine ring of ThDP. Remarkably, the H291A-alpha mutation results in a complete order-to-disorder transition of the loop region, which precludes the binding of the substrate lipoyl-bearing domain to E1b. The H146A-beta' mutation, on the other hand, does not alter the loop structure, but nullifies the reductive acylation activity of E1b. Our results suggest that: 1) His291-alpha plays a structural rather than a catalytic role in the binding of cofactor ThDP and the lipoyl-bearing domain to E1b, and 2) His146-beta' is an essential catalytic residue, probably functioning as a proton donor in the reductive acylation of lipoamide on the lipoyl-bearing domain.

7479879	Crystal structure of Pseudomonas aeruginosa catabolic ornithine transcarbamoylase at 3.0-A resolution: a different oligomeric organization in the transcarbamoylase family.	The crystal structure of the Glu-105-->Gly mutant of catabolic ornithine transcarbamoylase (OTCase; carbamoyl phosphate + L-ornithine = orthophosphate + L-citrulline, EC 2.1.3.3) from Pseudomonas aeruginosa has been determined at 3.0-A resolution. This mutant is blocked in the active R (relaxed) state. The structure was solved by the molecular replacement method, starting from a crude molecular model built from a trimer of the catalytic subunit of another transcarbamoylase, the extensively studied aspartate transcarbamoylase (ATCase) from Escherichia coli. This model was used to generate initial low-resolution phases at 8-A resolution, which were extended to 3-A by noncrystallographic symmetry averaging. Four phase extensions were required to obtain an electron density map of very high quality from which the final model was built. The structure, including 4020 residues, has been refined to 3-A, and the current crystallographic R value is 0.216. No solvent molecules have been added to the model. The catabolic OTCase is a dodecamer composed of four trimers organized in a tetrahedral manner. Each monomer is composed of two domains. The carbamoyl phosphate binding domain shows a strong structural homology with the equivalent ATCase part. In contrast, the other domain, mainly implicated in the binding of the second substrate (ornithine for OTCase and aspartate for ATCase) is poorly conserved. The quaternary structures of these two allosteric transcarbamoylases are quite divergent: the E. coli ATCase has pseudo-32 point-group symmetry, with six catalytic and six regulatory chains; the catabolic OTCase has 23 point-group symmetry and only catalytic chains. However, both enzymes display homotropic and heterotropic cooperativity.

9063874	Control of oxidation-reduction potentials in flavodoxin from Clostridium beijerinckii: the role of conformation changes.	X-ray analyses of wild-type and mutant flavodoxins from Clostridium beijerinckii show that the conformation of the peptide Gly57-Asp58, in a bend near the isoalloxazine ring of FMN, is correlated with the oxidation state of the FMN prosthetic group. The Gly-Asp peptide may adopt any of three conformations: trans O-up, in which the carbonyl oxygen of Gly57 (O57) points toward the flavin ring; trans O-down, in which O57 points away from the flavin; and cis O-down. Interconversions among these conformers that are linked to oxidation-reduction of the flavin can modulate the redox potentials of bound FMN. In the semiquinone and reduced forms of the protein, the Gly57-Asp58 peptide adopts the trans O-up conformation and accepts a hydrogen bond from the flavin N5H [Smith, W. W., Burnett, R. M., Darling, G. D., & Ludwig, M. L. (1977) J. Mol. Biol. 117, 195-225; Ludwig, M. L., & Luschinsky, C. L. (1992) in Chemistry and Biochemistry of Flavoenzymes III (M|ller, F., Ed.) pp 427-466, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL]. Analyses reported in this paper confirm that, in crystals of wild-type oxidized C. beijerinckii flavodoxin, the Gly57-Asp58 peptide adopts the O-down orientation and isomerizes to the cis conformation. This cis form is preferentially stabilized in the crystals by intermolecular hydrogen bonding to Asn137. Structures for the mutant Asn137Ala indicate that a mixture of all three conformers, mostly O-down, exists in oxidized C. beijerinckii flavodoxin in the absence of intermolecular hydrogen bonds. Redox potentials have been manipulated by substitutions that alter the conformational energies of the bend at 56M-G-D-E. The mutation Asp58Pro was constructed to study a case where energies for cis-trans conversion would be different from that of wild type. Intermolecular interactions with Asn137 are precluded in the crystal, yet Gly57-Pro58 is cis, and O-down, when the flavin is oxidized. Reduction of the flavin induces rearrangement to the trans O-up conformation. Redox potential shifts reflect the altered energies associated with the peptide rearrangement; E(ox/sq) decreases by approximately 60 mV (1.3 kcal/mol). Further, the results of mutation of Gly57 agree with predictions that a side chain at residue 57 should make addition of the first electron more difficult, by raising the energy of the O-up conformer that forms when the flavin is reduced to its semiquinone state. The ox/sq potentials in the mutants Gly57Ala, Gly57Asn, and Gly57Asp are all decreased by approximately 60 mV (1.3 kcal/mol). Introduction of the beta-branched threonine side chain at position 57 has much larger effects on the conformations and potentials. The Thr57-Asp58 peptide adopts a trans O-down conformation when the flavin is oxidized; upon reduction to the semiquinone, the 57-58 peptide rotates to a trans O-up conformation resembling that found in the wild-type protein. Changes in FMN-protein interactions and in conformational equilibria in G57T combine to decrease the redox potential for the ox/sq equilibrium by 180 mV (+4.0 kcal/mol) and to increase the sq/hq potential by 80 mV (-1.7 kcal/mol). A thermodynamic scheme is introduced as a framework for rationalizing the properties of wild-type flavodoxin and the effects of the mutations.

15647363	Prion protein NMR structures of elk and of mouse/elk hybrids.	The NMR structure of the recombinant elk prion protein (ePrP), which represents the cellular isoform (ePrPC) in the healthy organism, is described here. As anticipated from the highly conserved amino acid sequence, ePrPC has the same global fold as other mammalian prion proteins (PrPs), with a flexibly disordered "tail" of residues 23-124 and a globular domain 125-226 with three alpha-helices and a short antiparallel beta-sheet. However, ePrPC shows a striking local structure variation when compared with most other mammalian PrPs, in particular human, bovine, and mouse PrPC. A loop of residues 166-175, which links the beta-sheet with the alpha2-helix and is part of a hypothetical "protein X" epitope, is outstandingly well defined, whereas this loop is disordered in the other species. Based on NMR structure determinations of two mouse PrP variants, mPrP[N174T] and mPrP[S170N,N174T], this study shows that the structured loop in ePrPC relates to these two local amino acid exchanges, so that mPrP[S170N,N174T] exactly mimics ePrPC. These results are evaluated in the context of recent reports on chronic wasting disease (CWD) in captive and free-ranging deer and elk in the U.S. and Canada, and an animal model is proposed for support of future research on CWD.

9930994	Effects of the E177K mutation in D-amino acid transaminase. Studies on an essential coenzyme anchoring group that contributes to stereochemical fidelity.	D-Amino acid transaminase is a bacterial enzyme that uses pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) as a cofactor to catalyze the conversion of D-amino acids into their corresponding alpha-keto acids. This enzyme has already been established as a target for novel antibacterial agents through suicide inactivation by a number of compounds. To improve their potency and specificity, the detailed enzyme mechanism, especially the role of its PLP cofactor, is under investigation. Many PLP-dependent transaminases have a negatively charged amino acid residue forming a salt-bridge with the pyridine nitrogen of its cofactor that promotes its protonation to stabilize the formation of a ketimine intermediate, which is subsequently hydrolyzed in the normal transaminase reaction pathway. However, alanine racemase has a positively charged arginine held rigidly in place by an extensive hydrogen bond network that may destabilize the ketimine intermediate, and make it too short-lived for a transaminase type of hydrolysis to occur. To test this hypothesis, we changed Glu-177 into a titratable, positively charged lysine (E177K). The crystal structure of this mutant shows that the positive charge of the newly introduced lysine side chain points away from the nitrogen of the cofactor, which may be due to electrostatic repulsions not being overcome by a hydrogen bond network such as found in alanine racemase. This mutation makes the active site more accessible, as exemplified by both biochemical and crystallographic data: CD measurements indicated a change in the microenvironment of the protein, some SH groups become more easily titratable, and at pH 9.0 the PMP peak appeared around 315 nm rather than at 330 nm. The ability of this mutant to convert L-alanine into D-alanine increased about 10-fold compared to wild-type and to about the same extent as found with other active site mutants. On the other hand, the specific activity of the E177K mutant decreased more than 1000-fold compared to wild-type. Furthermore, titration with L-alanine resulted in the appearance of an enzyme-substrate quinonoid intermediate absorbing around 500 nm, which is not observed with usual substrates or with the wild-type enzyme in the presence of L-alanine. The results overall indicate the importance of charged amino acid side chains relative to the coenzyme to maintain high catalytic efficiency.

15170341	Role of hydrogen bonding in the active site of human manganese superoxide dismutase.	The side chain of Gln143, a conserved residue in manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD), forms a hydrogen bond with the manganese-bound solvent and is critical in maintaining catalytic activity. The side chains of Tyr34 and Trp123 form hydrogen bonds with the carboxamide of Gln143. We have replaced Tyr34 and Trp123 with Phe in single and double mutants of human MnSOD and measured their catalytic activity by stopped-flow spectrophotometry and pulse radiolysis. The replacements of these side chains inhibited steps in the catalysis as much as 50-fold; in addition, they altered the gating between catalysis and formation of a peroxide complex to yield a more product-inhibited enzyme. The replacement of both Tyr34 and Trp123 in a double mutant showed that these two residues interact cooperatively in maintaining catalytic activity. The crystal structure of Y34F/W123F human MnSOD at 1.95 A resolution suggests that this effect is not related to a conformational change in the side chain of Gln143, which does not change orientation in Y34F/W123F, but rather to more subtle electronic effects due to the loss of hydrogen bonding to the carboxamide side chain of Gln143. Wild-type MnSOD containing Trp123 and Tyr34 has approximately the same thermal stability compared with mutants containing Phe at these positions, suggesting the hydrogen bonds formed by these residues have functional rather than structural roles.

11513589	Structural characterization of the enzyme-substrate, enzyme-intermediate, and enzyme-product complexes of thiamin phosphate synthase.	Thiamin phosphate synthase catalyzes the formation of thiamin phosphate from 4-amino-5-(hydroxymethyl)-2-methylpyrimidine pyrophosphate and 5-(hydroxyethyl)-4-methylthiazole phosphate. Several lines of evidence suggest that the reaction proceeds via a dissociative mechanism. The previously determined crystal structure of thiamin phosphate synthase in complex with the reaction products, thiamin phosphate and magnesium pyrophosphate, provided a view of the active site and suggested a number of additional experiments. We report here seven new crystal structures primarily involving crystals of S130A thiamin phosphate synthase soaked in solutions containing substrates or products. We prepared S130A thiamin phosphate synthase with the intent of characterizing the enzyme-substrate complex. Surprisingly, in three thiamin phosphate synthase structures, the active site density cannot be modeled as either substrates or products. For these structures, the best fit to the electron density is provided by a model that consists of independent pyrimidine, pyrophosphate, and thiazole phosphate fragments, consistent with a carbenium ion intermediate. The resulting carbenium ion is likely to be further stabilized by proton transfer from the pyrimidine amino group to the pyrophosphate to give the pyrimidine iminemethide, which we believe is the species that is observed in the crystal structures.

7500345	Kinetic and structural characterization of mutations of glycine 216 in alpha-lytic protease: a new target for engineering substrate specificity.	Gly216 in the active site of the broadly specific MA190 mutant of alpha-lytic protease has been found to be remarkably tolerant of amino acid substitutions. Side-chains as large as Trp can be accommodated within the substrate-binding pocket without abolishing catalysis, and have major effects upon the substrate specificity of the enzyme. Kinetic characterization of eleven enzymatically active mutants against a panel of eight substrates clearly revealed the functional consequences of the substitutions at position 216. To understand better the structural basis for their altered specificity, the GA216 + MA190 and GL216 + MA190 mutants have been crystallized both with and without a representative series of peptide boronic acid transition-state analog inhibitors. An empirical description and non-parametric statistical analysis of structural variation among these enzyme: inhibitor complexes is presented. The roles of active site plasticity and dynamics in alpha-lytic protease function and substrate preference are also addressed. The results strongly suggest that substrate specificity determination in alpha-lytic protease is a distributed property of the active site and substrate molecule.

10545326	Metal-ion affinity and specificity in EF-hand proteins: coordination geometry and domain plasticity in parvalbumin.	BACKGROUND: The EF-hand family is a large set of Ca(2+)-binding proteins that contain characteristic helix-loop-helix binding motifs that are highly conserved in sequence. Members of this family include parvalbumin and many prominent regulatory proteins such as calmodulin and troponin C. EF-hand proteins are involved in a variety of physiological processes including cell-cycle regulation, second messenger production, muscle contraction, microtubule organization and vision. RESULTS: We have determined the structures of parvalbumin mutants designed to explore the role of the last coordinating residue of the Ca(2+)-binding loop. An E101D substitution has been made in the parvalbumin EF site. The substitution decreases the Ca(2+)-binding affinity 100-fold and increases the Mg(2+)-binding affinity 10-fold. Both the Ca(2+)- and Mg(2+)-bound structures have been determined, and a structural basis has been proposed for the metal-ion-binding properties. CONCLUSIONS: The E101D mutation does not affect the Mg(2+) coordination geometry of the binding loop, but it does pull the F helix 1.1 A towards the loop. The E101D-Ca(2+) structure reveals that this mutant cannot obtain the sevenfold coordination preferred by Ca(2+), presumably because of strain limits imposed by tertiary structure. Analysis of these results relative to previously reported structural information supports a model wherein the characteristics of the last coordinating residue and the plasticity of the Ca(2+)-binding loop delimit the allowable geometries for the coordinating sphere.

12717027	The catalytic mechanism of galactose mutarotase.	Galactose mutarotase catalyzes the first step in normal galactose metabolism by catalyzing the conversion of beta-D-galactose to alpha-D-galactose. The structure of the enzyme from Lactococcus lactis was recently solved in this laboratory and shown to be topologically similar to domain 5 of beta-galactosidase. From this initial X-ray analysis, four amino acid residues were demonstrated to be intimately involved in sugar binding to the protein: His 96, His 170, Asp 243, and Glu 304. Here we present a combined X-ray crystallographic and kinetic analysis designed to examine the role of these residues in the reaction mechanism of the enzyme. For this investigation, the following site-directed mutant proteins were prepared: H96N, H170N, D243N, D243A, E304Q, and E304A. All of the structures of these proteins, complexed with either glucose or galactose, were solved to a nominal resolution of 1.95 A or better, and their kinetic parameters were measured against D-galactose, D-glucose, L-arabinose, or D-xylose. From these studies, it can be concluded that Glu 304 and His 170 are critical for catalysis and that His 96 and Asp 243 are important for proper substrate positioning within the active site. Specifically, Glu 304 serves as the active site base to initiate the reaction by removing the proton from the C-1 hydroxyl group of the sugar substrate and His 170 functions as the active site acid to protonate the C-5 ring oxygen.

9609690	A mutational analysis of binding interactions in an antigen-antibody protein-protein complex.	Alanine scanning mutagenesis, double mutant cycles, and X-ray crystallography were used to characterize the interface between the anti-hen egg white lysozyme (HEL) antibody D1.3 and HEL. Twelve out of the 13 nonglycine contact residues on HEL, as determined by the high-resolution crystal structure of the D1.3-HEL complex, were individually truncated to alanine. Only four positions showed a DeltaDeltaG (DeltaGmutant - DeltaGwild-type) of greater than 1.0 kcal/mol, with HEL residue Gln121 proving the most critical for binding (DeltaDeltaG = 2.9 kcal/mol). These residues form a contiguous patch at the periphery of the epitope recognized by D1.3. To understand how potentially disruptive mutations in the antigen are accommodated in the D1.3-HEL interface, we determined the crystal structure to 1.5 A resolution of the complex between D1.3 and HEL mutant Asp18 --> Ala. This mutation results in a DeltaDeltaG of only 0.3 kcal/mol, despite the loss of a hydrogen bond and seven van der Waals contacts to the Asp18 side chain. The crystal structure reveals that three additional water molecules are stably incorporated in the antigen-antibody interface at the site of the mutation. These waters help fill the cavity created by the mutation and form part of a rearranged solvent network linking the two proteins. To further dissect the energetics of specific interactions in the D1.3-HEL interface, double mutant cycles were carried out to measure the coupling of 14 amino acid pairs, 10 of which are in direct contact in the crystal structure. The highest coupling energies, 2.7 and 2.0 kcal/mol, were measured between HEL residue Gln121 and D1.3 residues VLTrp92 and VLTyr32, respectively. The interaction between Gln121 and VLTrp92 consists of three van der Waals contacts, while the interaction of Gln121 with VLTyr32 is mediated by a hydrogen bond. Surprisingly, however, most cycles between interface residues in direct contact in the crystal structure showed no significant coupling. In particular, a number of hydrogen-bonded residue pairs were found to make no net contribution to complex stabilization. We attribute these results to accessibility of the mutation sites to water, such that the mutated residues exchange their interaction with each other to interact with water. This implies that the strength of the protein-protein hydrogen bonds in these particular cases is comparable to that of the protein-water hydrogen bonds they replace. Thus, the simple fact that two residues are in direct contact in a protein-protein interface cannot be taken as evidence that there necessarily exists a productive interaction between them. Rather, the majority of such contacts may be energetically neutral, as in the D1.3-HEL complex.

9614112	Crystal structures of reaction intermediates of L-2-haloacid dehalogenase and implications for the reaction mechanism.	Crystal structures of L-2-haloacid dehalogenase from Pseudomonas sp. YL complexed with monochloroacetate, L-2-chlorobutyrate, L-2-chloro-3-methylbutyrate, or L-2-chloro-4-methylvalerate were determined at 1.83-, 2.0-, 2.2-, and 2.2-A resolutions, respectively, using the complex crystals prepared with the S175A mutant, which are isomorphous with those of the wild-type enzyme. These structures exhibit unique structural features that correspond to those of the reaction intermediates. In each case, the nucleophile Asp-10 is esterified with the dechlorinated moiety of the substrate. The substrate moieties in all but the monochloroacetate intermediate have a D-configuration at the C2 atom. The overall polypeptide fold of each of the intermediates is similar to that of the wild-type enzyme. However, it is clear that the Asp-10-Ser-20 region moves to the active site in all of the intermediates, and the Tyr-91-Asp-102 and Leu-117-Arg-135 regions make conformational changes in all but the monochloroacetate intermediates. Ser-118 is located near the carboxyl group of the substrate moiety; this residue probably serves as a binding residue for the substrate carboxyl group. The hydrophobic pocket, which is primarily composed of the Tyr-12, Gln-42, Leu-45, Phe-60, Lys-151, Asn-177, and Trp-179 side chains, exists around the alkyl group of the substrate moiety. This pocket may play an important role in stabilizing the alkyl group of the substrate moiety through hydrophobic interactions, and may also play a role in determining the stereospecificity of the enzyme. Moreover, a water molecule, which is absent in the substrate-free enzyme, is present in the vicinities of the carboxyl carbon of Asp-10 and the side chains of Asp-180, Asn-177, and Ala-175 in each intermediate. This water molecule may hydrolyze the ester intermediate and its substrate. These findings crystallographically demonstrate that the enzyme reaction proceeds through the formation of an ester intermediate with the enzyme's nucleophile Asp-10.

15465054	Structures of unliganded and inhibitor complexes of W168F, a Loop6 hinge mutant of Plasmodium falciparum triosephosphate isomerase: observation of an intermediate position of loop6.	The enzymatic reaction of triosephosphate isomerase (TIM) is controlled by the movement of a loop (loop6, residues 166-176). Crystal structures of TIMs from a variety of sources have revealed that the loop6, which is in an open conformation in the unliganded enzyme, adopts a closed conformation in inhibitor complexes. In contrast, structures with loop open conformation are obtained in most of the complexes of TIM from the malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum (PfTIM). W168 is a conserved N-terminal hinge residue, involved in different sets of interactions in the "open" and "closed" forms of loop6. The role of W168 in determining the loop conformation was examined by structural studies on the mutant W168F and its complexes with ligands. The three-dimensional structures of unliganded mutant (1.8 A) and complexes with sulfate (2.8 A) and glycerol-2-phosphate (G2P) (2.8 A) have been determined. Loop6 was found disordered in these structures, reflecting the importance of W168 in stabilizing either the open or the closed states. Critical sequence differences between the Plasmodium enzyme and other TIMs may influence the equilibrium between the closed and open forms. Examination of the environment of the loop6 shows that its propensity for the open or the closed forms is influenced not only by Phe96 as suggested earlier, but also by Asn233, which occurs in the vicinity of the active site. This residue is Gly in the other TIM sequences and probably plays a crucial role in the mode of ligand binding, which in turn affects the loop opening/closing process in PfTIM.

11254385	Structure and functionality of a designed p53 dimer.	P53 is a homotetrameric tumor suppressor protein involved in transcriptional control of genes that regulate cell proliferation and death. In order to probe the role that oligomerization plays in this capacity, we have previously designed and characterized a series of p53 proteins with altered oligomeric states through hydrophilc substitution of residues Met340 or Leu344 in the normally tetrameric oligomerization domain. Although such mutations have little effect on the overall secondary structural content of the oligomerization domain, both solubility and the resistance to thermal denaturation are substantially reduced relative to that of the wild-type domain. Here, we report the design and characterization of a double-mutant p53 with alterations of residues at positions Met340 and Leu344. The double-mutations Met340Glu/Leu344Lys and Met340Gln/Leu344Arg resulted in distinct dimeric forms of the protein. Furthermore, we have verified by NMR structure determination that the double-mutant Met340Gln/Leu344Arg is essentially a "half-tetramer". Analysis of the in vivo activities of full-length p53 oligomeric mutants reveals that while cell-cycle arrest requires tetrameric p53, transcriptional transactivation activity of monomers and dimers retain roughly background and half of the wild-type activity, respectively.

14636605	Stabilization of a tetrameric malate dehydrogenase by introduction of a disulfide bridge at the dimer-dimer interface.	Malate dehydrogenase (MDH) from the moderately thermophilic bacterium Chloroflexus aurantiacus (CaMDH) is a tetrameric enzyme, while MDHs from mesophilic organisms usually are dimers. To investigate the potential contribution of the extra dimer-dimer interface in CaMDH with respect to thermal stability, we have engineered an intersubunit disulfide bridge designed to strengthen dimer-dimer interactions. The resulting mutant (T187C, containing two 187-187 disulfide bridges in the tetramer) showed a 200-fold increase in half-life at 75 degrees C and an increase of 15 deg. C in apparent melting temperature compared to the wild-type. The crystal structure of the mutant (solved at 1.75 A resolution) was essentially identical with that of the wild-type, with the exception of the added inter-dimer disulfide bridge and the loss of an aromatic intra-dimer contact. Remarkably, the mutant and the wild-type had similar temperature optima and activities at their temperature optima, thus providing a clear case of uncoupling of thermal stability and thermoactivity. The results show that tetramerization may contribute to MDH stability to an extent that depends strongly on the number of stabilizing interactions in the dimer-dimer interface.

15351654	Structure of the constitutively active double mutant CheYD13K Y106W alone and in complex with a FliM peptide.	CheY is a member of the response regulator protein superfamily that controls the chemotactic swimming response of motile bacteria. The CheY double mutant D13K Y106W (CheY**) is resistant to phosphorylation, yet is a highly effective mimic of phosphorylated CheY in vivo and in vitro. The conformational attributes of this protein that enable it to signal in a phosphorylation-independent manner are unknown. We have solved the crystal structure of selenomethionine-substituted CheY** in the presence of its target, a peptide (FliM16) derived from the flagellar motor switch, FliM, to 1.5A resolution with an R-factor of 19.6%. The asymmetric unit contains four CheY** molecules, two with FliM16 bound, and two without. The two CheY** molecules in the asymmetric unit that are bound to FliM16 adopt a conformation similar to BeF3- -activated wild-type CheY, and also bind FliM16 in a nearly identical manner. The CheY** molecules that do not bind FliM16 are found in a conformation similar to unphosphorylated wild-type CheY, suggesting that the active phenotype of this mutant is enabled by a facile interconversion between the active and inactive conformations. Finally, we propose a ligand-binding model for CheY and CheY**, in which Ile95 changes conformation in a Tyr/Trp106-dependent manner to accommodate FliM.

7473737	Mutations at positions 153 and 328 in Escherichia coli alkaline phosphatase provide insight towards the structure and function of mammalian and yeast alkaline phosphatases.	In order to understand some of the differences between human placental, human, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Escherichia coli alkaline phosphatases in specific activity, activation by magnesium, and pH versus activity profiles, the X-ray crystal structures of three mutant E. coli alkaline phosphatases have been determined. The aligned sequences of alkaline phosphatases from mammalian, yeast and E. coli show that 25 to 30% of the amino acids are absolutely conserved and the active site residues are completely conserved with the exception of residues 153, 328 and 155. The bacterial enzyme has a salt-bridge, Asp153/Lys328, near the third metal binding site which, based on sequence homology, is apparently absent in the yeast and mammalian enzymes. The human enzymes have histidine at positions 153 and 328, and the yeast enzyme has histidine at position 328. In the E. coli enzyme, Asp153 was replaced by histidine (D153H), Lys328 was replaced by histidine (K328H), and a double mutant (DM) was constructed containing both mutations. The structure of the K328H enzyme was refined using cross-validation to a resolution of 2.3 A with a working R-factor of 0.181 and a free R-factor of 0.249. The DM structure was determined to a resolution of 2.5 A with a working R-factor of 0.166 and a free R-factor of 0.233. The structure of the D135H enzyme, which has been reported to a resolution of 2.4 A, has been re-refined using cross-validation to a working R-factor of 0.179 and a free R-factor of 0.239 for controlled comparisons with the two new structures. In all three structures the most significant changes are related to the bound phosphate inhibitor and the identity of the metal ion in the third binding site. The changes in the position of the phosphate group and the alterations at the third metal binding site indicate the structural basis for the variations in the steady-state kinetic parameters previously reported for these enzymes.

9514755	Generation of ligand binding sites in T4 lysozyme by deficiency-creating substitutions.	Several variants of T4 lysozyme have been identified that sequester small organic ligands in cavities or clefts. To evaluate potential binding sites for non-polar molecules, we screened a number of hydrophobic large-to-small mutants for stabilization in the presence of benzene. In addition to Leu99-->Ala, binding was indicated for at least five other mutants. Variants Met102-->Ala and Leu133-->Gly, and a crevice mutant, Phe104-->Ala, were further characterized using X-ray crystallography and thermal denaturation. As predicted from the shape of the cavity in the benzene complex, mutant Leu133-->Gly also bound p-xylene. We attempted to enlarge the cavity of the Met102-->Ala mutant into a deep crevice through an additional substitution, but the double mutant failed to bind ligands because an adjacent helix rearranged into a non-helical structure, apparently due to the loss of packing interactions. In general, the protein structure contracted slightly to reduce the volume of the void created by truncating substitutions and expanded upon binding the non-polar ligand, with shifts similar to those resulting from the mutations.A polar molecule binding site was also created by truncating Arg95 to alanine. This creates a highly complementary buried polar environment that can be utilized as a specific "receptor" for a guanidinium ion. Our results suggest that creating a deficiency through truncating mutations of buried residues generates "binding potential" for ligands with characteristics similar to the deleted side-chain. Analysis of complex and apo crystal structures of binding and non-binding mutants suggests that ligand size and shape as well as protein flexibility and complementarity are all determinants of binding. Binding at non-polar sites is governed by hydrophobicity and steric interactions and is relatively permissive. Binding at a polar site is more restrictive and requires extensive complementarity between the ligand and the site.

11752789	Crystallization and preliminary crystallographic studies of five crystal forms of Escherichia coli L-asparaginase II (Asp90Glu mutant).	L-Asparaginase II from Escherichia coli with an Asp90Glu mutation in the active site has been crystallized in five polymorphic forms. Crystals of all polymorphs suitable for X-ray diffraction experiments were obtained by the vapour-diffusion method. Crystals of form I belong to the monoclinic system (space group C2), have unit-cell parameters a = 73.1, b = 133.1, c = 62.6 A, beta = 108.8 degrees and diffract to 2.27 A resolution. Three of the crystal forms are orthorhombic, with unit-cell parameters a = 225.4, b = 128.0, c = 62.6 A (form II, P2(1)2(1)2), a = 59.9, b = 71.2, c = 130.6 A (form III, primitive cell) and a = 73.8, b = 122.1, c = 124.2 A (form IV, P2(1)2(1)2(1) or P2(1)2(1)2); the crystals diffract to 2.33, 3.5 and 1.7 A, respectively. Polymorph V is trigonal, space group P3(1)21, with unit-cell parameters a = 123.1, c = 83.8 A; the crystals diffract to 2.65 A resolution.

8134350	Structure of the gene V protein of bacteriophage f1 determined by multiwavelength x-ray diffraction on the selenomethionyl protein.	The crystal structure of the dimeric gene V protein of bacteriophage f1 was determined using multiwavelength anomalous diffraction on the selenomethionine-containing wild-type and isoleucine-47-->methionine mutant proteins with x-ray diffraction data phased to 2.5 A resolution. The structure of the wild-type protein has been refined to an R factor of 19.2% using native data to 1.8 A resolution. The structure of the gene V protein was used to obtain a model for the protein portion of the gene V protein-single-stranded DNA complex.

12578369	Structural and biochemical exploration of a critical amino acid in human 8-oxoguanine glycosylase.	Members of the HhH-GPD superfamily of DNA glycosylases are responsible for the recognition and removal of damaged nucleobases from DNA. The hallmark of these proteins is a motif comprising a helix-hairpin-helix followed by a Gly/Pro-rich loop and terminating in an invariant, catalytically essential aspartic acid residue. In this study, we have probed the role of this Asp in human 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase (hOgg1) by mutating it to Asn (D268N), Glu (D268E), and Gln (D268Q). We show that this aspartate plays a dual role, acting both as an N-terminal alpha-helix cap and as a critical residue for catalysis of both base excision and DNA strand cleavage by hOgg1. Mutation of this residue to asparagine, another helix-capping residue, preserves stability of the protein while drastically reducing enzymatic activity. A crystal structure of this mutant is the first to reveal the active site nucleophile Lys249 in the presence of lesion-containing DNA; this structure offers a tantalizing suggestion that base excision may occur by cleavage of the glycosidic bond and then attachment of Lys249. Mutation of the aspartic acid to glutamine and glutamic acid destabilizes the protein fold to a significant extent but, surprisingly, preserves catalytic activity. Crystal structures of these mutants complexed with an unreactive abasic site in DNA reveal these residues to adopt a sterically disfavored helix-capping conformation.

14990731	Crystal structures of a multidrug-resistant human immunodeficiency virus type 1 protease reveal an expanded active-site cavity.	The goal of this study was to use X-ray crystallography to investigate the structural basis of resistance to human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) protease inhibitors. We overexpressed, purified, and crystallized a multidrug-resistant (MDR) HIV-1 protease enzyme derived from a patient failing on several protease inhibitor-containing regimens. This HIV-1 variant contained codon mutations at positions 10, 36, 46, 54, 63, 71, 82, 84, and 90 that confer drug resistance to protease inhibitors. The 1.8-angstrom (A) crystal structure of this MDR patient isolate reveals an expanded active-site cavity. The active-site expansion includes position 82 and 84 mutations due to the alterations in the amino acid side chains from longer to shorter (e.g., V82A and I84V). The MDR isolate 769 protease "flaps" stay open wider, and the difference in the flap tip distances in the MDR 769 variant is 12 A. The MDR 769 protease crystal complexes with lopinavir and DMP450 reveal completely different binding modes. The network of interactions between the ligands and the MDR 769 protease is completely different from that seen with the wild-type protease-ligand complexes. The water molecule-forming hydrogen bonds bridging between the two flaps and either the substrate or the peptide-based inhibitor are lacking in the MDR 769 clinical isolate. The S1, S1', S3, and S3' pockets show expansion and conformational change. Surface plasmon resonance measurements with the MDR 769 protease indicate higher k(off) rates, resulting in a change of binding affinity. Surface plasmon resonance measurements provide k(on) and k(off) data (K(d) = k(off)/k(on)) to measure binding of the multidrug-resistant protease to various ligands. This MDR 769 protease represents a new antiviral target, presenting the possibility of designing novel inhibitors with activity against the open and expanded protease forms.

9032381	The refined crystal structure of the 3C gene product from hepatitis A virus: specific proteinase activity and RNA recognition.	The virally encoded 3C proteinases of picornaviruses process the polyprotein produced by the translation of polycistronic viral mRNA. The X-ray crystallographic structure of a catalytically active mutant of the hepatitis A virus (HAV) 3C proteinase (C24S) has been determined. Crystals of this mutant of HAV 3C are triclinic with unit cell dimensions a = 53.6 A, b = 53.5 A, c = 53.2 A, alpha = 99.1 degrees, beta = 129.0 degrees, and gamma = 103.3 degrees. There are two molecules of HAV 3C in the unit cell of this crystal form. The structure has been refined to an R factor of 0.211 (Rfree = 0.265) at 2.0-A resolution. Both molecules fold into the characteristic two-domain structure of the chymotrypsin-like serine proteinases. The active-site and substrate-binding regions are located in a surface groove between the two beta-barrel domains. The catalytic Cys 172 S(gamma) and His 44 N(epsilon2) are separated by 3.9 A; the oxyanion hole adopts the same conformation as that seen in the serine proteinases. The side chain of Asp 84, the residue expected to form the third member of the catalytic triad, is pointed away from the side chain of His 44 and is locked in an ion pair interaction with the epsilon-amino group of Lys 202. A water molecule is hydrogen bonded to His 44 N(delta1). The side-chain phenolic hydroxyl group of Tyr 143 is close to this water and to His 44 N(delta1) and may be negatively charged. The glutamine specificity for P1 residues of substrate cleavage sites is attributed to the presence of a highly conserved His 191 in the S1 pocket. A very unusual environment of two water molecules and a buried glutamate contribute to the imidazole tautomer believed to be important in the P1 specificity. HAV 3C proteinase has the conserved RNA recognition sequence KFRDI located in the interdomain connection loop on the side of the molecule diametrically opposite the proteolytic site. This segment of polypeptide is located between the N- and C-terminal helices, and its conformation results in the formation of a well-defined surface with a strongly charged electrostatic potential. Presumably, this surface of HAV 3C participates in the recognition of the 5' and 3' nontranslated regions of the RNA genome during viral replication.

10669610	Structural basis for the higher Ca(2+)-activation of the regulated actin-activated myosin ATPase observed with Dictyostelium/Tetrahymena actin chimeras.	Replacement of residues 228-230 or 228-232 of subdomain 4 in Dictyostelium actin with the corresponding Tetrahymena sequence (QTA to KAY replacement: half chimera-1; QTAAS to KAYKE replacement: full chimera) leads to a higher Ca(2+)-activation of the regulated acto-myosin subfragment-1 ATPase activity. The ratio of ATPase activation in the presence of tropomyosin-troponin and Ca(2+) to that without tropomyosin-troponin becomes about four times as large as the ratio for the wild-type actin. To understand the structural basis of this higher Ca(2+)-activation, we have determined the crystal structures of the 1:1 complex of Dictyostelium mutant actins (half chimera-1 and full chimera) with gelsolin segment-1 to 2.0 A and 2.4 A resolution, respectively, together with the structure of wild-type actin as a control. Although there were local changes on the surface of the subdomain 4 and the phenolic side-chain of Tyr230 displaced the side-chain of Leu236 from a non-polar pocket to a more solvent-accessible position, the structures of the actin chimeras showed that the mutations in the 228-232 region did not introduce large changes in the overall actin structure. This suggests that residues near position 230 formed part of the tropomyosin binding site on actin in actively contracting muscle. The higher Ca(2+)-activation observed with A230Y-containing mutants can be understood in terms of a three-state model for thin filament regulation in which, in the presence of both Ca(2+) and myosin heads, the local changes of actin generated by the mutation (especially its phenolic side-chain) facilitate the transition of thin filaments from a "closed" state to an "open" state. Between 394 and 469 water molecules were identified in the different structures and it was found that actin recognizes hydrated forms of the adenine base and the Ca ion in the nucleotide binding site.

15062092	X-Ray structure determination of three mutants of the bacterial photosynthetic reaction centers from Rb. sphaeroides; altered proton transfer pathways.	In the photosynthetic reaction center (RC) from Rhodobacter sphaeroides, the reduction of a bound quinone molecule Q(B) is coupled with proton uptake. When Asp-L213 is replaced by Asn, proton transfer is inhibited. Proton transfer was restored by two second-site revertant mutations, Arg-M233-->Cys and Arg-H177-->His. Kinetic effects of Cd(2+) on proton transfer showed that the entry point in revertant RCs to be the same as in the native RC. The structures of the parental and two revertant RCs were determined at resolutions of 2.10, 1.80, and 2.75 A. From the structures, we were able to delineate alternate proton transfer pathways in the revertants. The main changes occur near Glu-H173, which allow it to substitute for the missing Asp-L213. The electrostatic changes near Glu-H173 cause it to be a good proton donor and acceptor, and the structural changes create a cavity which accommodates water molecules that connect Glu-H173 to other proton transfer components.

8157648	Identical mutations at corresponding positions in two homologous proteins with nonidentical effects.	The x-ray structure of a mutant (Gly72 to Asp) of the Escherichia coli ribose-binding protein with altered transport function has been solved and refined to 2.2-A resolution with a conventional R-factor (R-factor = [formula: see text]) of 16.0% and good stereochemistry. Comparison with the wild type ribose-binding protein shows that the structure is disturbed little at the actual mutation site, but quite appreciably in a neighboring loop. Changes in the surface of the protein at the site of mutation, however, seem to explain the functional effects. A corresponding mutation of the related glucose/galactose-binding protein has different structural and functional effects due to the different structural context of the mutation site in that protein. These results are consistent with the concept that these proteins have slightly different ways of interacting with the membrane components in transport and chemotaxis.

10964705	Crystal structures of the ribonuclease MC1 from bitter gourd seeds, complexed with 2'-UMP or 3'-UMP, reveal structural basis for uridine specificity.	Ribonuclease MC1 (RNase MC1) isolated from seeds of bitter gourd (Momordica charantia) consists of 190 amino acids and is characterized by a preferential cleavage at the 5'-side of uridine. This uridine specificity distinguishes RNase MC1 from other enzymes belonging to the RNase T2 family. The three-dimensional structures of RNase MC1, in a complex with either 2'-UMP or 3'-UMP, were determined at 1.48 and 1.77 A resolutions, respectively. The side chains of Gln9 and Asn71 interact with O4 and N3, respectively, of the uracil base by hydrogen bondings. In addition, the uracil base is sandwiched by the hydrophobic side chains of Leu73 and Phe80. Compared with these amino acid residues and corresponding residues in RNases in the RNase T2 family, Gln9 and Phe80 are highly conserved in the RNases in T2 family, while Asn71 and Leu73 in RNase MC1 are variant in sequences. It is thus likely that interactions of the side chains of Asn71 and Leu73 with the uracil base are responsible for the absolute uridine specificity of RNase MC1. Site-directed mutagenesis experiments showed that replacement of Asn by Thr decreased both the catalytic efficiency and the binding affinity by 2.3- and 7.0-fold, respectively, and substitution of Leu73 for Ala predominantly decreased the binding affinity by 14. 5-fold, compared with findings in case of wild-type RNase MC1. It is thus demonstrated that Asn71 and Leu73 play an essential role in uridine preference for RNase MC1.

9699637	Obligatory steps in protein folding and the conformational diversity of the transition state.	We have analyzed the existence of obligatory steps in the folding reaction of the alpha-spectrin SH3 domain by mutating Asp 48 (D48G), which is at position i+3 of an isolated two-residue type II' beta-turn. Calorimetry and X-ray analysis show an entropic stabilizing effect resulting from local changes at the dihedral angles of the beta-turn. Kinetic analysis of D48G shows that this beta-turn is fully formed in the transition state, while there is no evidence of its formation in an isolated fragment. Introduction of several mutations in the D48G protein reveals that the local stabilization has not significantly altered the transition state ensemble. All these results, together with previous analysis of other alpha-spectrin and src SH3 mutants, indicate that: (i) in the folding reaction there could be obligatory steps which are not necessarily part of the folding nucleus; (ii) transition state ensembles in beta-sheet proteins could be quite defined and conformationally restricted ('mechanic folding nucleus'); and (iii) transition state ensembles in some proteins could be evolutionarily conserved.

9799500	The hydroxyl of threonine 13 of the bovine 70-kDa heat shock cognate protein is essential for transducing the ATP-induced conformational change.	The mechanism by which ATP binding transduces a conformational change in 70-kDa heat shock proteins that results in release of bound peptides remains obscure. Wei and Hendershot demonstrated that mutating Thr37 of hamster BiP to glycine impeded the ATP-induced conformational change, as monitored by proteolysis [(1995) J. Biol. Chem. 270, 26670-26676]. We have mutated the equivalent resitude of the bovine heat shock cognate protein (Hsc70), Thr13, to serine, valine, and glycine. Solution small-angle X-ray scattering experiments on a 60-kDa fragment of Hsc70 show that ATP binding induces a conformational change in the T13S mutant but not the T13V or T13G mutants. The kinetics of ATP-induced tryptophan fluorescence intensity changes in the 60-kDa proteins is biphasic for the T13S mutant but monophasic for T13V or T13G, consistent with a conformational change following initial ATP binding in the T13S mutant but not the other two. Crystallographic structures of the ATPase fragments of the T13S and T13G mutants at 1.7 A resolution show that the mutations do not disrupt the ATP binding site and that the serine hydroxyl mimics the threonine hydroxyl in the wild-type structure. We conclude that the hydroxyl of Thr13 is essential for coupling ATP binding to a conformational change in Hsc70. Molecular modeling suggests this may result from the threonine hydroxyl hydrogen-bonding to a gamma-phosphate oxygen of ATP, thereby inducing a structural shift within the ATPase domain that couples to its interactions with the peptide binding domain.

9287153	Structure-function relationships in Anabaena ferredoxin: correlations between X-ray crystal structures, reduction potentials, and rate constants of electron transfer to ferredoxin:NADP+ reductase for site-specific ferredoxin mutants.	A combination of structural, thermodynamic, and transient kinetic data on wild-type and mutant Anabaena vegetative cell ferredoxins has been used to investigate the nature of the protein-protein interactions leading to electron transfer from reduced ferredoxin to oxidized ferredoxin:NADP+ reductase (FNR). We have determined the reduction potentials of wild-type vegetative ferredoxin, heterocyst ferredoxin, and 12 site-specific mutants at seven surface residues of vegetative ferredoxin, as well as the one- and two-electron reduction potentials of FNR, both alone and in complexes with wild-type and three mutant ferredoxins. X-ray crystallographic structure determinations have been carried out for six of the ferredoxin mutants. None of the mutants showed significant structural changes in the immediate vicinity of the [2Fe-2S] cluster, despite large decreases in electron-transfer reactivity (for E94K and S47A) and sizable increases in reduction potential (80 mV for E94K and 47 mV for S47A). Furthermore, the relatively small changes in Calpha backbone atom positions which were observed in these mutants do not correlate with the kinetic and thermodynamic properties. In sharp contrast to the S47A mutant, S47T retains electron-transfer activity, and its reduction potential is 100 mV more negative than that of the S47A mutant, implicating the importance of the hydrogen bond which exists between the side chain hydroxyl group of S47 and the side chain carboxyl oxygen of E94. Other ferredoxin mutations that alter both reduction potential and electron-transfer reactivity are E94Q, F65A, and F65I, whereas D62K, D68K, Q70K, E94D, and F65Y have reduction potentials and electron-transfer reactivity that are similar to those of wild-type ferredoxin. In electrostatic complexes with recombinant FNR, three of the kinetically impaired ferredoxin mutants, as did wild-type ferredoxin, induced large (approximately 40 mV) positive shifts in the reduction potential of the flavoprotein, thereby making electron transfer thermodynamically feasible. On the basis of these observations, we conclude that nonconservative mutations of three critical residues (S47, F65, and E94) on the surface of ferredoxin have large parallel effects on both the reduction potential and the electron-transfer reactivity of the [2Fe-2S] cluster and that the reduction potential changes are not the principal factor governing electron-transfer reactivity. Rather, the kinetic properties are most likely controlled by the specific orientations of the proteins within the transient electron-transfer complex.

15147186	Structural, kinetic, and mutational studies of the zinc ion environment in tetrameric cytidine deaminase.	The zinc-containing cytidine deaminase (CDA, EC 3.5.4.5) is a pyrimidine salvage enzyme catalyzing the hydrolytic deamination of cytidine and 2'-deoxycytidine forming uridine and 2'-deoxyuridine, respectively. Homodimeric CDA (D-CDA) and homotetrameric CDA (T-CDA) both contain one zinc ion per subunit coordinated to the catalytic water molecule. The zinc ligands in D-CDA are one histidine and two cysteine residues, whereas in T-CDA zinc is coordinated to three cysteines. Two of the zinc coordinating cysteines in T-CDA form hydrogen bonds to the conserved residue Arg56, and this residue together with the dipole moments from two alpha-helices partially neutralizes the additional negative charge in the active site, leading to a catalytic activity similar to D-CDA. Arg56 has been substituted by a glutamine (R56Q), the corresponding residue in D-CDA, an alanine (R56A), and an aspartate (R56D). Moreover, one of the zinc-liganding cysteines has been substituted by histidine to mimic D-CDA, alone (C53H) and in combination with R56Q (C53H/R56Q). R56A, R56Q, and C53H/R56Q contain the same amount of zinc as the wild-type enzyme. The zinc-binding capacity of R56D is reduced. Only R56A, R56Q, and C53H/R56Q yielded measurable CDA activity, R56A and R56Q with similar K(m) but decreased V(max) values compared to wild-type enzyme. Because of dissociation into its inactive subunits, it was impossible to determine the kinetic parameters for C53H/R56Q. R56A and C53H/R56Q display increased apparent pK(a) values compared to the wild-type enzyme and R56Q. On the basis of the structures of R56A, R56Q, and C53H/R56Q an explanation is provided of kinetic results and the apparent instability of C53H/R56Q.

10556241	Roles of catalytic residues in alpha-amylases as evidenced by the structures of the product-complexed mutants of a maltotetraose-forming amylase.	The crystal structures of the four product-complexed single mutants of the catalytic residues of Pseudomonas stutzeri maltotetraose-forming alpha-amylase, E219G, D193N, D193G and D294N, have been determined. Possible roles of the catalytic residues Glu219, Asp193 and Asp294 have been discussed by comparing the structures among the previously determined complexed mutant E219Q and the present mutant enzymes. The results suggested that Asp193 predominantly works as the base catalyst (nucleophile), whose side chain atom lies in close proximity to the C1-atom of Glc4, being involved in the intermediate formation in the hydrolysis reaction. While Asp294 works for tightly binding the substrate to give a twisted and a deformed conformation of the glucose ring at position -1 (Glc4). The hydrogen bond between the side chain atom of Glu219 and the O1-atom of Glc4, that implies the possibility of interaction via hydrogen, consistently present throughout these analyses, supports the generally accepted role of this residue as the acid catalyst (proton donor).

9578477	Lys42 and Ser42 variants of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from Pseudomonas fluorescens reveal that Arg42 is essential for NADPH binding.	The conserved Arg42 of the flavoprotein p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase is located at the entrance of the active site in a loop between helix H2 and sheet E1 of the FAD-binding domain. Replacement of Arg42 by Lys or Ser decreases the turnover rate of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from Pseudomonas fluorescens by more than two orders of magnitude. Rapid reaction kinetics show that the low activity of the Arg42 variants results from impaired binding of NADPH. In contrast to an earlier conclusion drawn for p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, substitution of Arg42 with Ser42 in the enzyme from P. fluorescens hardly disturbs the binding of FAD. Crystals of [Lys42]p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase complexed with 4-hydroxybenzoate diffract to 0.22-nm resolution. The structure of the Lys42 variant is virtually indistinguishable from the native enzyme with the flavin ring occupying the interior position within the active site. Lys42 in the mutant structure interacts indirectly via a solvent molecule with the 3-OH of the adenosine ribose moiety of FAD. Substrate perturbation difference spectra suggest that the Arg42 replacements influence the solvent accessibility of the flavin ring in the oxidized enzyme. In spite of this, the Arg42 variants fully couple enzyme reduction to substrate hydroxylation. Sequence-comparison studies suggest that Arg42 is involved in binding of the 2'-phosphoadenosine moiety of NADPH.

2544734	Three-dimensional structures of drug-resistant mutants of human rhinovirus 14.	Mutants of human rhinovirus 14 were isolated and characterized by searching for resistance to compounds that inhibit viral uncoating. The portions of the RNA that code for amino acids that surround the antiviral compound binding site were sequenced. X-ray analysis of two of these mutants, 1188 Val----Leu and 1199 Cys----Tyr, shows that these were single-site substitutions which would sterically hinder drug binding. Differences in the resistance of mutant viruses to various antiviral compounds may be rationalized in terms of the three-dimensional structures of these mutants. Predictions of the structures of mutant rhinovirus 14 with the substitutions 1188 Val----Leu, 1199 Cys----Tyr and 1199 Cys----Trp in VP1 were made using a molecular dynamics technique. The predicted structure of the 1199 Cys----Tyr mutant was consistent with the electron density map, while the 1188 Val----Leu prediction was not. Large (up to 1.4 A) conformational differences between native rhinovirus 14 and the 1199 Cys----Tyr mutant occurred in main-chain atoms near the mutation site. These changes, as well as the orientation of the 1199 tyrosine side-chain, were correctly predicted by the molecular dynamics calculation. The structure of the predicted 1199 Cys----Trp mutation is consistent with the drug-resistant properties of this virus.

8880915	Coupling between trans/cis proline isomerization and protein stability in staphylococcal nuclease.	The nucleases A produced by two strains of Staphylococcus aureus, which have different stabilities, differ only in the identity of the single amino acid at residue 124. The nuclease from the Foggi strain of S. aureus (by convention nuclease WT), which contains His124, is 1.9 kcal.mol-1 less stable (at pH 5.5 and 20 degrees C) than the nuclease from the V8 strain (by convention nuclease H124L), which contains Leu124. In addition, the population of the trans conformer at the Lys116-Pro117 peptide bond, as observed by NMR spectroscopy, is different for the two variants: about 15% for nuclease WT and 9% for nuclease H124L. In order to improve our understanding of the origin of these differences, we compared the properties of WT and H124L with those of the H124A and H124I variants. We discovered a correlation between effects of different residues at this position on protein stability and on stabilization of the cis configuration of the Lys116-Pro117 peptide bond. In terms of free energy, approximately 17% of the increase in protein stability manifests itself as stabilization of the cis configuration at Lys116-Pro117. This result implies that the differences in stability arise mainly from structural differences between the cis configurational isomers at Pro117 of the different variants at residue 124. We solved the X-ray structure of the cis form of the most stable variant, H124L, and compared it with the published high-resolution X-ray structure of the cis form of the most stable variant, WT (Hynes TR, Fox RO, 1991, Proteins Struct Funct Genet 10:92-105). The two structures are identical within experimental error, except for the side chain at residue 124, which is exposed in the models of both variants. Thus, the increased stability and changes in the trans/cis equilibrium of the Lys116-Pro117 peptide bond observed in H124L relative to WT are due to subtle structural changes that are not observed by current structure determination technique. Residue 124 is located in a helix. However, the stability changes are too large and follow the wrong order of stability to be explained simply by differences in helical propensity. A second site of conformational heterogeneity in native nuclease is found at the His46-Pro47 peptide bond, which is approximately 80% trans in both WT and H124L. Because proline to glycine substitutions at either residue 47 or 117 remove the structural heterogeneity at that position and increase protein stability, we determined the X-ray structures of H124L + P117G and H124L + P47G + P117G and the kinetic parameters of H124L, H124L + P47G, H124L + P117G, and H124L + P47G + P117G. The individual P117G and P47G mutations cause decreases in nuclease activity, with kcat affected more than Km, and their effects are additive. The P117G mutation in nuclease H124L leads to the same local conformational rearrangement described for the P117G mutant of WT (Hynes TR, Hodel A, Fox RO, 1994, Biochemistry 33:5021-5030). In both P117G mutants, the loop formed by residues 112-117 is located closer to the adjacent loop formed by residues 77-85, and residues 115-118 adopt a type I' beta-turn conformation with the Lys116-Gly117 peptide bond in the trans configuration, as compared with the parent protein in which these residues have a typeVIa beta-turn conformation with the Lys116-Pro117 peptide bond in the cis configuration. Addition of the P47G mutation appears not to cause any additional structural changes. However, the electron density for part of the loop containing this peptide bond was not strong enough to be interpreted.

16218957	Molecular basis for substrate recognition and drug resistance from 1.1 to 1.6 angstroms resolution crystal structures of HIV-1 protease mutants with substrate analogs.	HIV-1 protease (PR) and two drug-resistant variants--PR with the V82A mutation (PR(V82A)) and PR with the I84V mutation (PR(I84V))--were studied using reduced peptide analogs of five natural cleavage sites (CA-p2, p2-NC, p6pol-PR, p1-p6 and NC-p1) to understand the structural and kinetic changes. The common drug-resistant mutations V82A and I84V alter residues forming the substrate-binding site. Eight crystal structures were refined at resolutions of 1.10-1.60 A. Differences in the PR-analog interactions depended on the peptide sequence and were consistent with the relative inhibition. Analog p6(pol)-PR formed more hydrogen bonds of P2 Asn with PR and fewer van der Waals contacts at P1' Pro compared with those formed by CA-p2 or p2-NC in PR complexes. The P3 Gly in p1-p6 provided fewer van der Waals contacts and hydrogen bonds at P2-P3 and more water-mediated interactions. PR(I84V) showed reduced van der Waals interactions with inhibitor compared with PR, which was consistent with kinetic data. The structures suggest that the binding affinity for mutants is modulated by the conformational flexibility of the substrate analogs. The complexes of PR(V82A) showed smaller shifts of the main chain atoms of Ala82 relative to PR, but more movement of the peptide analog, compared to complexes with clinical inhibitors. PR(V82A) was able to compensate for the loss of interaction with inhibitor caused by mutation, in agreement with kinetic data, but substrate analogs have more flexibility than the drugs to accommodate the structural changes caused by mutation. Hence, these structures help to explain how HIV can develop drug resistance while retaining the ability of PR to hydrolyze natural substrates.

9878371	The R78K and D117E active-site variants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae soluble inorganic pyrophosphatase: structural studies and mechanistic implications.	We have solved the structure of two active-site variants of soluble inorganic pyrophosphatases (PPase), R78K and D117K, at resolutions of 1.85 and 2.15 A and R-factors of 19.5% and 18.3%, respectively.In the R78K variant structure, the high-affinity phosphate group (P1) is missing, consistent with the wild-type structure showing a bidentate interaction between P1 and Arg78, and solution data showing a decrease in P1 affinity in the variant. The structure explains why the mutation affects P1 and pyrophosphate binding much more than would be expected by the loss of one hydrogen bond: Lys78 forms an ion-pair with Asp71, precluding an interaction with P1. The R78K variant also provides the first direct evidence that the low-affinity phosphate group (P2) can adopt the structure that we believe is the immediate product of hydrolysis, with one of the P2 oxygen atoms co-ordinated to both activating metal ions (M1 and M2). If so, the water molecule (Wat1) between M1 and M2 in wild-type PPase is, indeed, the attacking nucleophile.The D117E variant structure likewise supports our model of catalysis, as the Glu117 variant carboxylate group is positioned where Wat1 is in the wild-type: the potent Wat1 nucleophile is replaced by a carboxylate co-ordinated to two metal ions. Alternative confirmations of Glu117 may allow Wat1 to be present but at much reduced occupancy, explaining why the pKa of the nucleophile increases by three pH units, even though there is relatively little distortion of the active site.These new structures, together with parallel functional studies measuring catalytic efficiency and ligand (metal ion, PPi and Pi) binding, provide strong evidence against a proposed mechanism in which Wat1 is considered unimportant for hydrolysis. They thus support the notion that PPase shares mechanistic similarity with the "two-metal ion" mechanism of polymerases.

3476160	Protein engineering of subtilisin BPN': enhanced stabilization through the introduction of two cysteines to form a disulfide bond.	Introduction of a disulfide bond by site-directed mutagenesis was found to enhance the stability of subtilisin BPN' (EC 3.4.21.14) under a variety of conditions. The location of the new disulfide bond was selected with the aid of a computer program, which scored various sites according to the amount of distortion that an introduced disulfide linkage would create in a 1.3-A X-ray model of native subtilisin BPN'. Of the several amino acid pairs identified by this program as suitable candidates, Thr-22 and Ser-87 were selected by using the additional requirement that the individual cysteine substitutions occur at positions that exhibit some degree of variability in related subtilisin amino acid sequences. A subtilisin variant containing cysteine residues at positions 22 and 87 was created by site-directed mutagenesis and was shown to have an activity essentially equivalent to that of the wild-type enzyme. Differential scanning calorimetry experiments demonstrated the variant protein to have a melting temperature 3.1 degrees C higher than that of the wild-type protein and 5.8 degrees C higher than that of the reduced form (-SH HS-) of the variant protein. Kinetic experiments performed under a variety of conditions, including 8 M urea, showed that the Cys-22/Cys-87 disulfide variant undergoes thermal inactivation at half the rate of that of the wild-type enzyme. The increased thermal stability of this disulfide variant is consistent with a decrease in entropy for the unfolded state relative to the unfolded state that contains no cross-link, as would be predicted from the statistical thermodynamics of polymers.

10508408	Structural consequences of the B5 histidine --> tyrosine mutation in human insulin characterized by X-ray crystallography and conformational analysis.	The addition of phenols to hexameric insulin solutions produces a particularly stable hexamer, resulting from a rearrangement in which residues B1-B8 change from an extended conformation (T-state) to form an alpha-helix (R-state). The R-state is, in part, stabilized by nonpolar interactions between the phenolic molecule and residue B5 His at the dimer-dimer interface. The B5 His --> Tyr mutant human insulin was constructed to see if the tyrosine side chain would mimic the effect of phenol binding in the hexamer and induce the R-state. In partial support of this hypothesis, the molecule crystallized as a half-helical hexamer (T(3)R(3)) in conditions that conventionally promote the fully nonhelical (T6) form. As expected, in the presence of phenol or resorcinol, the B5 Tyr hexamers adopt the fully helical (R6) conformation. Molecular modeling calculations were performed to investigate the conformational preference of the T-state B5 Tyr side chain in the T(3)R(3) form, this side chain being associated with structural perturbations of the A7-A10 loop in an adjacent hexamer. For an isolated dimer, several different orientations of the side chain were found, which were close in energy and readily interconvertible. In the crystal environment only one of these conformations remains low in energy; this conformation corresponds to that observed in the crystal structure. This suggests that packing constraints around residue B5 Tyr result in the observed structural rearrangements. Thus, rather than promoting the R-state in a manner analogous to phenol, the mutation appears to destabilize the T-state. These studies highlight the role of B5 His in determining hexamer conformation and in mediating crystal packing interactions, properties that are likely be important in vivo.

11243784	Transthyretin stability as a key factor in amyloidogenesis: X-ray analysis at atomic resolution.	Transthyretin (TTR) amyloidosis is a conformational disturbance, which, like other amyloidoses, represents a life threat. Here, we report a TTR variant, TTR Thr119Met, that has been shown to have a protective role in the development of clinical symptoms in carriers of TTR Val30Met, one of the most frequent variants among TTR amyloidosis patients. In order to understand this effect, we have determined the structures of the TTR Val30Met/Thr119Met double mutant isolated from the serum of one patient and of both the native and thyroxine complex of TTR Thr119Met. Major conclusions are: (i) new H-bonds within each monomer and monomer-monomer inter-subunit contacts, e.g. Ser117-Ser117 and Met119-Tyr114, increase protein stability, possibly leading to the protective effect of the TTR Val30Met/Thr119Met variant when compared to the single variant TTR Val30Met. (ii) The mutated residue (Met119) extends across the thyroxine binding channel inducing conformational changes that lead to closer contacts between different dimers within the tetramer. The data, at atomic resolution, were essential to detect, for the first time, the subtle changes in the inter-subunit contacts of TTR, and explain the non-amyloidogenic potential of the TTR Thr119Met variant, improving considerably current research on the TTR amyloid fibril formation pathway.

9041631	The NMR side-chain assignments and solution structure of enzyme IIBcellobiose of the phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase system of Escherichia coli.	The assignment of the side-chain NMR resonances and the determination of the three-dimensional solution structure of the C10S mutant of enzyme IIBcellobiose (IIBcel) of the phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase system of Escherichia coli are presented. The side-chain resonances were assigned nearly completely using a variety of mostly heteronuclear NMR experiments, including HCCH-TOCSY, HCCH-COSY, and COCCH-TOCSY experiments as well as CBCACOHA, CBCA(CO)NH, and HBHA(CBCA)(CO)NH experiments. In order to obtain the three-dimensional structure, NOE data were collected from 15N-NOESY-HSQC, 13C-HSQC-NOESY, and 2D NOE experiments. The distance restraints derived from these NOE data were used in distance geometry calculations followed by molecular dynamics and simulated annealing protocols. In an iterative procedure, additional NOE assignments were derived from the calculated structures and new structures were calculated. The final set of structures, calculated with approximately 2000 unambiguous and ambiguous distance restraints, has an rms deviation of 1.1 A on C alpha atoms. IIBcel consists of a four stranded parallel beta-sheet, in the order 2134. The sheet is flanked with two and three alpha-helices on either side. Residue 10, a cysteine in the wild-type enzyme, which is phosphorylated during the catalytic cycle, is located at the end of the first beta-strand. A loop that is proposed to be involved in the binding of the phosphoryl-group follows the cysteine. The loop appears to be disordered in the unphosphorylated state.

12731868	Crystal structures of the ribonuclease MC1 mutants N71T and N71S in complex with 5'-GMP: structural basis for alterations in substrate specificity.	Ribonuclease MC1 (RNase MC1), isolated from bitter gourd seeds, is a uridine specific RNase belonging to the RNase T2 family. Mutations of Asn71 in RNase MC1 to the amino acids Thr (N71T) and Ser (N71S) in guanosine preferential RNases altered the substrate specificity from uridine specific to guanosine specific, as shown by the transphosphorylation of diribonucleoside monophosphates [Numata, T., et al. (2001) Biochemistry 40, 524-530]. To elucidate the structural basis for the alteration of substrate specificity, crystal structures of the RNase MC1 mutants N71T and N71S, free or complexed with 5'-GMP, were determined at resolutions higher than 2 A. In the N71T-5'-GMP and N71S-5'-GMP complexes, the guanine moiety was, as in the case of the uracil moiety bound to wild-type RNase MC1, firmly stabilized in the B2 site by an extensive network of hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions. Structure comparisons showed that mutations of Asn71 to Thr or Ser cause an enlargement of the B2 site, which then make it feasible to insert a guanine base into the B2 site of mutants N71T and N71S. This binding further allows for hydrogen bonding interaction of the side chain hydroxyl groups of Thr71 or Ser71 with the N7 atom of the guanine base. The mode of guanine binding of mutants N71T and N71S was found to be essentially identical to that of a guanosine preferential RNase NW from Nicotiana glutinosa. In particular, hydrogen bonds between the N7 atom of the guanine base and the hydroxyl groups of the amino acids at position 71 (RNase MC1 numbering) were completely conserved in three guanosine preferential enzymes, thereby indicating that the hydrogen bond may play an essential role in guanine binding in guanosine preferential RNases in the RNase T2 family. Consequently, it can be concluded that amino acids at position 71 (RNase MC1 numbering) serve as one of the determinants for substrate specificity (or preference) in the RNase T2 fimily by changing the size and shape of the B2 site.

8869640	An engineered Staphylococcus aureus PC1 beta-lactamase that hydrolyses third-generation cephalosporins.	The beta-lactamase from Staphylococcus aureus PC1 has been cloned into an Escherichia coli vector for site-directed mutagenesis and high-level protein expression. A mutant enzyme has been produced in which Ala238 is replaced by a serine, and Ile239 is deleted (A238S:I239del). The engineered enzyme hydrolyses third-generation cephalosporins substantially more rapidly than the parental enzyme does, while hydrolysis of benzylpenicillin is slower with the mutant than with the wild-type and native enzymes. The mutant beta-lactamase has been crystallized and the structure determined and refined at 2.8 A resolution. The disposition of the beta-strand which forms the side of the active site is altered in comparison with the native S. aureus beta-lactamase structure, widening the active site cleft and providing space to accommodate the bulky side-chains of the third-generation cephalosporins.

7520279	Crystal structures of wild-type p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase complexed with 4-aminobenzoate,2,4-dihydroxybenzoate, and 2-hydroxy-4-aminobenzoate and of the Tyr222Ala mutant complexed with 2-hydroxy-4-aminobenzoate. Evidence for a proton channel and a new binding mode of the flavin ring.	The crystal structures of wild-type p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from Pseudomonas fluorescens, complexed with the substrate analogues 4-aminobenzoate, 2,4-dihydroxybenzoate, and 2-hydroxy-4-aminobenzoate have been determined at 2.3-, 2.5-, and 2.8-A resolution, respectively. In addition, the crystal structure of a Tyr222Ala mutant, complexed with 2-hydroxy-4-aminobenzoate, has been determined at 2.7-A resolution. The structures have been refined to R factors between 14.5% and 15.8% for data between 8.0 A and the high-resolution limit. The differences between these complexes and the wild-type enzyme-substrate complex are all concentrated in the active site region. Binding of substrate analogues bearing a 4-amino group (4-aminobenzoate and 2-hydroxy-4-aminobenzoate) leads to binding of a water molecule next to the active site Tyr385. As a result, a continuous hydrogen-bonding network is present between the 4-amino group of the substrate analogue and the side chain of His72. It is likely that this hydrogen-bonding network is transiently present during normal catalysis, where it may or may not function as a proton channel assisting the deprotonation of the 4-hydroxyl group of the normal substrate upon binding to the active site. Binding of substrate analogues bearing a hydroxyl group at the 2-position (2,4-dihydroxybenzoate and 2-hydroxy-4-aminobenzoate) leads to displacement of the flavin ring from the active site. The flavin is no longer in the active site (the "in" conformation) but is in the cleft leading to the active site instead (the "out" conformation). It is proposed that movement of the FAD out of the active site may provide an entrance for the substrate to enter the active site and an exit for the product to leave.

11851415	Cation-induced stabilization of the engineered cation-binding loop in cytochrome c peroxidase (CcP).	We have previously shown that the K(+) site found in the proximal heme pocket of ascorbate peroxidase (APX) could be successfully engineered into the closely homologous cytochrome c peroxidase (CcP) [Bonagura et al., (1996) Biochemistry 35, 6107-6115; Bonagura et al. (1999) Biochemistry 38, 5538-5545]. In addition, specificity could be switched to binding Ca(2+) as found in other peroxidases [Bonagura et al. (1999) J. Biol. Chem. 274, 37827-37833]. The introduction of a proximal cation-binding site also promotes conversion of the Trp191 containing cation-binding loop from a "closed" to an "open" conformer. In the present study we have changed a crucial hinge residue of the cation-binding loop, Asn195, to Pro which stabilizes the loop, albeit, only in the presence of bound K(+). The crystal structure of this mutant, N195PK2, has been refined to 1.9 A. As predicted, introduction of this crucial hinge residue stabilizes the cation-binding loop in the presence of the bound K(+). As in earlier work, the characteristic EPR signal of Trp191 cation radical becomes progressively weaker with increasing [K(+)] and the lifetime of the Trp191 radical also has been considerably shortened in this mutant. This mutant CcP exhibits reduced enzyme activity, which could be titrated to lower levels with increasing [K(+)] when horse heart cytochrome c is the substrate. However, with yeast cytochrome c as the substrate, the mutant was as active as wild-type at low ionic strength, but 40-fold lower at high ionic strength. We attribute this difference to a change in the rate-limiting step as a function of ionic strength when yeast cytochrome c is the substrate.

11210138	Analysis of catalytic residues of Thermoactinomyces vulgaris R-47 alpha-amylase II (TVA II) by site-directed mutagenesis.	To confirm that the catalytic residues (Asp325, Glu354, and Asp421) are necessary for the hydrolysis of starch, pullulan, and cyclodextrins, we constructed TVA II mutated by site-directed mutagenesis. The mutated enzymes (D325N, E354Q, and D421N) had markedly reduced levels of activity, less than 0.006% of the wild type, indicating that these three residues are the catalytic sites for these substrates. Even E354D had reduced levels of activity, less than 0.05% of wild type. These four mutated enzymes retained a trace of activity. From the result of hydrolysis patterns for maltohexaose, in particular, D421N, unlike D325N and E354Q, catalyzed transglycosylation rather than hydrolysis. The results suggest that Asp421 could function to capture water molecules.

11327835	Structural and kinetic analysis of the chemical rescue of the proton transfer function of carbonic anhydrase II.	Histidine 64 in human carbonic anhydrase II (HCA II) functions in the catalytic pathway of CO(2) hydration as a shuttle to transfer protons between the zinc-bound water and bulk water. Catalysis of the exchange of (18)O between CO(2) and water, measured by mass spectrometry, is dependent on this proton transfer and was decreased more than 10-fold for H64A HCA II compared with wild-type HCA II. The loss of catalytic activity of H64A HCA II could be rescued by 4-methylimidazole (4-MI), an exogenous proton donor, in a saturable process with a maximum activity of 40% of wild-type HCA II. The crystal structure of the rescued complex at 1.6 A resolution shows 4-MI bound in the active-site cavity of H64A HCA II, through pi stacking interactions with Trp 5 and H-bonding interactions with water molecules. In this location, 4-MI is about 12 A from the zinc and approximates the observed "out" position of His 64 in the structure of the wild-type enzyme. 4-MI appears to compensate for the absence of His 64 and rescues the catalytic activity of the H64A HCA II mutant. This result strongly suggests that the out conformation of His 64 is effective in the transfer of protons between the zinc-bound solvent molecule and solution.

8823158	Structure and kinetics of the beta-lactamase mutants S70A and K73H from Staphylococcus aureus PC1.	Two mutant beta-lactamases from Staphylococcus aureus PC1 which probe key catalytic residues have been produced by site-directed mutagenesis. In the S70A enzyme, the nucleophilic group that attacks the beta-lactam carbonyl carbon atom was eliminated. Consequently, the kcat values for hydrolysis of benzylpenicillin and nitrocefin have been reduced by 10(4)-10(5) compared with the wild-type enzyme. The crystal structure of S70A beta-lactamase has been determined at 2.1 A resolution. With the exception of the mutation site, the structure is identical to that of the native enzyme. The residual activity is attributed either to mistranslation that leads to production of wild-type enzyme and/or to remaining features of the active site that stabilize the tetrahedral transition state. Soaking of the crystals with ampicillin or clavulanate, followed by flash-freezing, has been carried out and the structures examined at 2.0 A resolution. For both experiments, the difference electron density maps revealed buildup of density in the active site that presumably corresponds to beta-lactam binding. However, neither electron density is sufficiently clear for defining the atomic details of the bound compounds. The K73H beta-lactamase has been prepared to test the possible role of Lys73 in proton transfer. It exhibits no detectable activity toward benzylpenicillin, and 10(5)-fold reduction of kcat for nitrocefin hydrolysis compared with the wild-type enzyme. No significant recovery of activity has been measured when the pH was varied between 5.0 and 8.0. The crystal structure of K73H beta-lactamase has been determined at 1.9 A resolution. While the overall structure is similar to that of the native enzyme, the electrostatic interactions between His73 and neighboring residues indicate that the imidazole ring is positively charged. In addition, the hydroxyl group of Ser70 adopts a position that is incompatible with nucleophilic attack on substrates. A crystal soaked with ampicillin was flash-frozen, and diffraction data were collected at 2.1 A resolution. The electron density map showed no indication of substrate binding.

15549494	Structural and biochemical implications of single amino acid substitutions in the nucleotide-dependent switch regions of the nitrogenase Fe protein from Azotobacter vinelandii.	The structures of nitrogenase Fe proteins with defined amino acid substitutions in the previously implicated nucleotide-dependent signal transduction pathways termed switch I and switch II have been determined by X-ray diffraction methods. In the Fe protein of nitrogenase the nucleotide-dependent switch regions are responsible for communication between the sites responsible for nucleotide binding and hydrolysis and the [4Fe-4S] cluster of the Fe protein and the docking interface that interacts with the MoFe protein upon macromolecular complex formation. In this study the structural characterization of the Azotobacter vinelandii nitrogenase Fe protein with Asp at position 39 substituted by Asn in MgADP-bound and nucleotide-free states provides an explanation for the experimental observation that the altered Fe proteins form a trapped complex subsequent to a single electron transfer event. The structures reveal that the substitution allows the formation of a hydrogen bond between the switch I Asn39 and the switch II Asp125. In the structure of the native enzyme the analogous interaction between the side chains of Asp39 and Asp125 is precluded due to electrostatic repulsion. These results suggest that the electrostatic repulsion between Asp39 and Asp125 is important for dissociation of the Fe protein:MoFe protein complex during catalysis. In a separate study, the structural characterization of the Fe protein with Asp129 substituted by Glu provides the structural basis for the observation that the Glu129-substituted variant in the absence of bound nucleotides has biochemical properties in common with the native Fe protein with bound MgADP. Interactions of the longer Glu side chain with the phosphate binding loop (P-loop) results in a similar conformation of the switch II region as the conformation that results from the binding of the phosphate of ADP to the P-loop.

10903949	Insights into molybdenum cofactor deficiency provided by the crystal structure of the molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis protein MoaC.	BACKGROUND: The molybdenum cofactor (Moco) is an essential component of a large family of enzymes involved in important transformations in carbon, nitrogen and sulfur metabolism. The Moco biosynthetic pathway is evolutionarily conserved and found in archaea, eubacteria and eukaryotes. In humans, genetic deficiencies of enzymes involved in this pathway trigger an autosomal recessive and usually deadly disease with severe neurological symptoms. The MoaC protein, together with the MoaA protein, is involved in the first step of Moco biosynthesis. RESULTS: MoaC from Escherichia coli has been expressed and purified to homogeneity and its crystal structure determined at 2 A resolution. The enzyme is organized into a tightly packed hexamer with 32 symmetry. The monomer consists of an antiparallel, four-stranded beta sheet packed against two long alpha helices, and its fold belongs to the ferredoxin-like family. Analysis of structural and biochemical data strongly suggests that the active site is located at the interface of two monomers in a pocket that contains several strictly conserved residues. CONCLUSIONS: Asp128 in the putative active site appears to be important for catalysis as its replacement with alanine almost completely abolishes protein activity. The structure of the Asp128-->Ala variant reveals substantial conformational changes in an adjacent loop. In the human MoaC ortholog, substitution of Thr182 with proline causes Moco deficiency, and the corresponding substitution in MoaC severely compromises activity. This residue is located near the N-terminal end of helix alpha4 at an interface between two monomers. The MoaC structure provides a framework for the analysis of additional dysfunctional mutations in the corresponding human gene.

10051558	Unexpected crucial role of residue 225 in serine proteases.	Residue 225 in serine proteases of the chymotrypsin family is Pro or Tyr in more than 95% of nearly 300 available sequences. Proteases with Y225 (like some blood coagulation and complement factors) are almost exclusively found in vertebrates, whereas proteases with P225 (like degradative enzymes) are present from bacteria to human. Saturation mutagenesis of Y225 in thrombin shows that residue 225 affects ligand recognition up to 60,000-fold. With the exception of Tyr and Phe, all residues are associated with comparable or greatly reduced catalytic activity relative to Pro. The crystal structures of three mutants that differ widely in catalytic activity (Y225F, Y225P, and Y225I) show that although residue 225 makes no contact with substrate, it drastically influences the shape of the water channel around the primary specificity site. The activity profiles obtained for thrombin also suggest that the conversion of Pro to Tyr or Phe documented in the vertebrates occurred through Ser and was driven by a significant gain (up to 50-fold) in catalytic activity. In fact, Ser and Phe are documented in 4% of serine proteases, which together with Pro and Tyr account for almost the entire distribution of residues at position 225. The unexpected crucial role of residue 225 in serine proteases explains the evolutionary selection of residues at this position and shows that the structural determinants of protease activity and specificity are more complex than currently believed. These findings have broad implications in the rational design of enzymes with enhanced catalytic properties.

11384233	2-Amino-6-arylsulfonylbenzonitriles as non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors of HIV-1.	A series of 2-amino-5-arylthiobenzonitriles (1) was found to be active against HIV-1. Structural modifications led to the sulfoxides (2) and sulfones (3). The sulfoxides generally showed antiviral activity against HIV-1 similar to that of 1. The sulfones, however, were the most potent series of analogues, a number having activity against HIV-1 in the nanomolar range. Structural-activity relationship (SAR) studies suggested that a meta substituent, particularly a meta methyl substituent, invariably increased antiviral activities. However, optimal antiviral activities were manifested by compounds where both meta groups in the arylsulfonyl moiety were substituted and one of the substituents was a methyl group. Such a disubstitution led to compounds 3v, 3w, 3x, and 3y having IC50 values against HIV-1 in the low nanomolar range. When gauged for their broad-spectrum antiviral activity against key non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI) related mutants, all the di-meta-substituted sulfones 3u-z and the 2-naphthyl analogue 3ee generally showed single-digit nanomolar activity against the V106A and P236L strains and submicromolar to low nanomolar activity against strains E138K, V108I, and Y188C. However, they showed a lack of activity against the K103N and Y181C mutant viruses. The elucidation of the X-ray crystal structure of the complex of 3v (739W94) in HIV-1 reverse transcriptase showed an overlap in the binding domain when compared with the complex of nevirapine in HIV-1 reverse transcriptase. The X-ray structure allowed for the rationalization of SAR data and potencies of the compounds against the mutants.

10211818	Dissection of the structural and functional role of a conserved hydration site in RNase T1.	The reoccurrence of water molecules in crystal structures of RNase T1 was investigated. Five waters were found to be invariant in RNase T1 as well as in six other related fungal RNases. The structural, dynamical, and functional characteristics of one of these conserved hydration sites (WAT1) were analyzed by protein engineering, X-ray crystallography, and (17)O and 2H nuclear magnetic relaxation dispersion (NMRD). The position of WAT1 and its surrounding hydrogen bond network are unaffected by deletions of two neighboring side chains. In the mutant Thr93Gln, the Gln93N epsilon2 nitrogen replaces WAT1 and participates in a similar hydrogen bond network involving Cys6, Asn9, Asp76, and Thr91. The ability of WAT1 to form four hydrogen bonds may explain why evolution has preserved a water molecule, rather than a side-chain atom, at the center of this intricate hydrogen bond network. Comparison of the (17)O NMRD profiles from wild-type and Thr93Gln RNase T1 yield a mean residence time of 7 ns at 27 degrees C and an orientational order parameter of 0.45. The effects of mutations around WAT1 on the kinetic parameters of RNase T1 are small but significant and probably relate to the dynamics of the active site.

11575933	Structural mechanisms of drug resistance for mutations at codons 181 and 188 in HIV-1 reverse transcriptase and the improved resilience of second generation non-nucleoside inhibitors.	Mutations at either Tyr181 or Tyr188 within HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) give high level resistance to many first generation non-nucleoside inhibitors (NNRTIs) such as the anti-AIDS drug nevirapine. By comparison second generation inhibitors, for instance the drug efavirenz, show much greater resilience to these mutations. In order to understand the structural basis for these differences we have determined a series of seven crystal structures of mutant RTs in complexes with first and second generation NNRTIs as well as one example of an unliganded mutant RT. These are Tyr181Cys RT (TNK-651) to 2.4 A, Tyr181Cys RT (efavirenz) to 2.6 A, Tyr181Cys RT (nevirapine) to 3.0 A, Tyr181Cys RT (PETT-2) to 3.0 A, Tyr188Cys RT (nevirapine) to 2.6 A, Tyr188Cys RT (UC-781) to 2.6 A and Tyr188Cys RT (unliganded) to 2.8 A resolution. In the two previously published structures of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase with mutations at 181 or 188 no side-chain electron density was observed within the p66 subunit (which contains the inhibitor binding pocket) for the mutated residues. In contrast the mutated side-chains can be seen in the NNRTI pocket for all seven structures reported here, eliminating the possibility that disordering contributes to the mechanism of resistance. In the case of the second generation compounds efavirenz with Tyr181Cys RT and UC-781 with Tyr188Cys RT there are only small rearrangements of either inhibitor within the binding site compared to wild-type RT and also for the first generation compounds TNK-651, PETT-2 and nevirapine with Tyr181Cys RT. For nevirapine with the Tyr188Cys RT there is however a more substantial movement of the drug molecule. We conclude that protein conformational changes and rearrangements of drug molecules within the mutated sites are not general features of these particular inhibitor/mutant combinations. The main contribution to drug resistance for Tyr181Cys and Tyr188Cys RT mutations is the loss of aromatic ring stacking interactions for first generation compounds, providing a simple explanation for the resilience of second generation NNRTIs, as such interactions make much less significant contribution to their binding.

1931963	Structural basis for broad specificity in alpha-lytic protease mutants.	Binding pocket mutants of alpha-lytic protease (Met 192----Ala and Met 213----Ala) have been constructed recently in an effort to create a protease specific for Met just prior to the scissile bond. Instead, mutation resulted in proteases with extraordinarily broad specificity profiles and high activity [Bone, R., Silen, J. L., & Agard, D. A. (1989) Nature 339, 191-195]. To understand the structural basis for the unexpected specificity profiles of these mutants, high-resolution X-ray crystal structures have been determined for complexes of each mutant with a series of systematically varying peptidylboronic acids. These inhibitory analogues of high-energy reaction intermediates provide models for how substrates with different side chains interact with the enzyme during the transition state. Fifteen structures have been analyzed qualitatively and quantitatively with respect to enzyme-inhibitor hydrogen-bond lengths, buried hydrophobic surface area, unfilled cavity volume, and the magnitude of inhibitor accommodating conformational adjustments (particularly in the region of another binding pocket residue, Val 217A). Comparison of these four parameters with the Ki of each inhibitor and the kcat and Km of the analogous substrates indicates that while no single structural parameter consistently correlates with activity or inhibition, the observed data can be understood as a combination of effects. Furthermore, the relative contribution of each term differs for the three enzymes, reflecting the altered conformational energetics of each mutant. From the extensive structural analysis, it is clear that enzyme flexibility, especially in the region of Val 217A, is primarily responsible for the exceptionally broad specificity observed in either mutant. Taken together, the observed patterns of substrate specificity can be understood to arise directly from interactions between the substrate and the residues lining the specificity pocket and indirectly from interactions between peripheral regions of the protein and the active-site region that serve to modulate active-site flexibility.

8652549	Modulation of a salt link does not affect binding of phosphate to its specific active transport receptor.	Electrostatic interactions are among the key forces determining the structure and function of proteins. These are exemplified in the liganded form of the receptor, a phosphate binding protein from Escherichia coli. The phosphate, completely dehydrated and buried in the receptor, is bound by 12 hydrogen bonds as well as a salt link with Arg 135. We have modulated the ionic attraction while preserving the hydrogen bonds by mutating Asp 137, also salt linked to Arg 135, to Asn, Gly or Thr. High-resolution crystallographic analysis revealed that Gly and Thr (but not Asn) mutant proteins have incorporated a more electronegative Cl- in place of the Asp carboxylate. That no dramatic effect on phosphate affinity was produced by these ionic perturbations indicates a major role for hydrogen bonds and other local dipoles in the binding and charge stabilization of ionic ligands.

9790663	Kinetic analysis and X-ray structure of haloalkane dehalogenase with a modified halide-binding site.	Haloalkane dehalogenase (DhlA) catalyzes the hydrolysis of haloalkanes via an alkyl-enzyme intermediate. Trp175 forms a halogen/halide-binding site in the active-site cavity together with Trp125. To get more insight in the role of Trp175 in DhlA, we mutated residue 175 and explored the kinetics and X-ray structure of the Trp175Tyr enzyme. The mutagenesis study indicated that an aromatic residue at position 175 is important for the catalytic performance of DhlA. Pre-steady-state kinetic analysis of Trp175Tyr-DhlA showed that the observed 6-fold increase of the Km for 1,2-dibromoethane (DBE) results from reduced rates of both DBE binding and cleavage of the carbon-bromine bond. Furthermore, the enzyme isomerization preceding bromide release became 4-fold faster in the mutant enzyme. As a result, the rate of hydrolysis of the alkyl-enzyme intermediate became the main determinant of the kcat for DBE, which was 2-fold higher than the wild-type kcat. The X-ray structure of the mutant enzyme at pH 6 showed that the backbone structure of the enzyme remains intact and that the tyrosine side chain lies in the same plane as Trp175 in the wild-type enzyme. The Clalpha-stabilizing aromatic rings of Tyr175 and Trp125 are 0.7 A further apart and due to the smaller size of the mutated residue, the volume of the cavity has increased by one-fifth. X-ray structures of mutant and wild-type enzyme at pH 5 demonstrated that the Tyr175 side chain rotated away upon binding of an acetic acid molecule, leaving one of its oxygen atoms hydrogen bonded to the indole nitrogen of Trp125 only. These structural changes indicate a weakened interaction between residue 175 and the halogen atom or halide ion in the active site and help to explain the kinetic changes induced by the Trp175Tyr mutation.

11021969	Three-dimensional structure of a human pancreatic ribonuclease variant, a step forward in the design of cytotoxic ribonucleases.	We have determined the crystal structure of a human pancreatic ribonuclease or RNase 1 variant at 1.65 A resolution. Five residues in the N-terminal region were substituted by the corresponding amino acids of the bovine seminal RNase. In addition, a Pro to Ser mutation was present at position 50. The substitution of part of the N terminus has been critical both in improving the expression of this enzyme as a recombinant protein and in achieving its crystallisation. The determination of the crystal structure revealed the characteristic RNase fold including a V-shaped beta-sheet and three alpha-helices. It differs from its bovine RNase orthologue mainly in the loop regions. The active-site cleft shows a similar architecture to that of its bovine counterpart, with the essential residues occupying equivalent positions. In the present structure, however, His119 is displaced as it is in the structure of RNase A at high pH. An interaction model of human ribonuclease with the ribonuclease inhibitor, together with inhibition assays, indicate that, in contrast to RNase A, the modification of the loop beta4beta5 is not enough to avoid inhibition. This study represents the first crystallographic approach to the human enzyme, and should constitute an invaluable tool for the design of ribonuclease variants with acquired cytotoxic properties.

11738044	The structure of the feruloyl esterase module of xylanase 10B from Clostridium thermocellum provides insights into substrate recognition.	BACKGROUND: Degradation of the plant cell wall requires the synergistic action of a consortium of predominantly modular enzymes. In Clostridiae, these biocatalysts are organized into a supramolecular assembly termed a "cellulosome." This multienzyme complex possesses, in addition to its well-described cellulolytic activity, an apparatus specific for xylan degradation. Cinnamic acid esterases hydrolyze the ferulate groups involved in the crosslinking of arabinoxylans to lignin and thus play a key role in the degradation of the plant cell wall in addition to having promising industrial and medical applications. RESULTS: We have cloned and overexpressed the feruloyl esterase module from a 5 domain xylanase, Xyn10B from Clostridium thermocellum. The native structure at 1.6 A resolution has been solved with selenomethionine multiple wavelength anomalous dispersion and refined to a final R(free) of 17.8%. The structure of a hydrolytically inactive mutant, S954A, in complex with the reaction product ferulic acid has been refined at a resolution of 1.4 A with an R(free) of 16.0%. CONCLUSIONS: The C. thermocellum Xyn10B ferulic acid esterase displays the alpha/beta-hydrolase fold and possesses a classical Ser-His-Asp catalytic triad. Ferulate esterases are characterized by their specificity, and the active center reveals the binding site for ferulic acid and related compounds. Ferulate binds in a small surface depression that possesses specificity determinants for both the methoxy and hydroxyl ring substituents of the substrate. There appears to be a lack of specificity for the xylan backbone, which may reflect the intrinsic chemical heterogeneity of the natural substrate.

11310979	Preliminary crystallographic studies of Y25F mutant of periplasmic Escherichia coli L-asparaginase.	Periplasmic Escherichia coli L-asparaginase II with Y25F mutation in the active-site cavity has been obtained by recombinant techniques. The protein was crystallized in a new hexagonal form (P6(5)22). Single crystals of this polymorph, suitable for X-ray diffraction, were obtained by vapor diffusion using 2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol as precipitant (pH 4.8). The crystals are characterized by a = 81.0, c = 341.1 A and diffract to 2.45 A resolution. The asymmetric unit contains two protein molecules arranged into an AB dimer. The physiologically relevant ABA'B' homotetramer is generated by the action of the crystallographic 2-fold axis along [1, -1, 0]. Kinetic studies show that the loss of the phenolic hydroxyl group at position 25 brought about by the replacement of Y with F strongly impairs kcat without significantly affecting Km.

11827530	Exploring the role and the binding affinity of a second zinc equivalent in B. cereus metallo-beta-lactamase.	Metallo-beta-lactamases are a newly characterized family of zinc enzymes present in several pathogenic strains that represent an emerging clinical threat. Enzymes from different organisms exhibit an outstanding functional diversity, particularly in the metal ion requirements for activity. We have investigated the effect of the second zinc(II) equivalent in the enzyme betaLII from Bacillus cereus, naturally active in the mono-zinc(II) form. The enzyme is reversibly inactivated at low pH, due to dissociation of the two zinc(II) equivalents. The pH profile indicates that zinc-bound water in the mono-zinc(II) enzyme possesses a pK(a) below 4.9, indicating that a second zinc(II) equivalent is not needed for nucleophile activation. Instead, the second zinc(II) may contribute to properly anchor Asp120, that ultimately orients the attacking nucleophile in binuclear enzymes. This role may be fulfilled by Arg121 in mono-zinc enzymes, as suggested by the kinetic study of the R121C mutant in betaLII. In addition, it is demonstrated that Arg121 is not responsible for the low binding affinity of betaLII toward a second zinc(II) equivalent.

15182367	Human salivary alpha-amylase Trp58 situated at subsite -2 is critical for enzyme activity.	The nonreducing end of the substrate-binding site of human salivary alpha-amylase contains two residues Trp58 and Trp59, which belong to beta2-alpha2 loop of the catalytic (beta/alpha)(8) barrel. While Trp59 stacks onto the substrate, the exact role of Trp58 is unknown. To investigate its role in enzyme activity the residue Trp58 was mutated to Ala, Leu or Tyr. Kinetic analysis of the wild-type and mutant enzymes was carried out with starch and oligosaccharides as substrates. All three mutants exhibited a reduction in specific activity (150-180-fold lower than the wild type) with starch as substrate. With oligosaccharides as substrates, a reduction in k(cat), an increase in K(m) and distinct differences in the cleavage pattern were observed for the mutants W58A and W58L compared with the wild type. Glucose was the smallest product generated by these two mutants in the hydrolysis oligosaccharides; in contrast, wild-type enzyme generated maltose as the smallest product. The production of glucose by W58L was confirmed from both reducing and nonreducing ends of CNP-labeled oligosaccharide substrates. The mutant W58L exhibited lower binding affinity at subsites -2, -3 and +2 and showed an increase in transglycosylation activity compared with the wild type. The lowered affinity at subsites -2 and -3 due to the mutation was also inferred from the electron density at these subsites in the structure of W58A in complex with acarbose-derived pseudooligosaccharide. Collectively, these results suggest that the residue Trp58 plays a critical role in substrate binding and hydrolytic activity of human salivary alpha-amylase.

7922028	The high-resolution three-dimensional solution structures of the oxidized and reduced states of human thioredoxin.	BACKGROUND: Thioredoxin is a ubiquitous protein and is involved in a variety of fundamental biological functions. Its active site is conserved and has two redox active cysteines in the sequence Trp-Cys-Gly-Pro-Cys. No structures of the oxidized and reduced states from the same species have been determined at high resolution under the same conditions and using the same methods. Hence, any detailed comparison of the two oxidation states has been previously precluded. RESULTS: The reduced and oxidized states of the (C62A, C69A, C73A) mutant of human thioredoxin have been investigated by multidimensional heteronuclear NMR. Structures for both states were determined on the basis of approximately 28 experimental restraints per residue, and the resulting precision of the two structures is very high. Consequently, subtle differences between the oxidized and reduced states can be reliably assessed and evaluated. Small differences, particularly within and around the active site can be discerned. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the structures of the reduced and oxidized states of the (C62A, C69A, C73A) mutant of human thioredoxin are very similar (with a backbone atomic root mean square difference of about 0.9 A) and the packing of side chains within the protein core is nearly identical. The conformational change between oxidized and reduced human thioredoxin is very small and localized to areas in spatial proximity to the redox active cysteines. These subtle structural differences, in addition to the restriction of conformational freedom within the active site upon oxidation, may be important for the different activities of thioredoxin involving a variety of target proteins.

11124036	Structure-activity relationships in a peptidic alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor antagonist.	alpha-Conotoxins are small disulfide-constrained peptide toxins which act as antagonists at specific subtypes of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nACh receptors). In this study, we analyzed the structures and activities of three mutants of alpha-conotoxin ImI, a 12 amino acid peptide active at alpha7 nACh receptors, in order to gain insight into the primary and tertiary structural requirements of neuronal alpha-conotoxin specificity. NMR solution structures were determined for mutants R11E, R7L, and D5N, resulting in representative ensembles of 20 conformers with average pairwise RMSD values of 0.46, 0.52, and 0.62 A from their mean structures, respectively, for the backbone atoms N, C(alpha), and C' of residues 2-11. The R11E mutant was found to have activity near that of wild-type ImI, while R7L and D5N demonstrated activities reduced by at least two orders of magnitude. Comparison of the structures reveals a common two-loop architecture, with variations observed in backbone and side-chain dihedral angles as well as surface electrostatic potentials upon mutation. Correlation of these structures and activities with those from previously published studies emphasizes that existing hypotheses regarding the molecular determinants of alpha-conotoxin specificity are not adequate for explaining peptide activity, and suggests that more subtle features, visualized here at the atomic level, are important for receptor binding. These data, in conjunction with reported characterizations of the acetylcholine binding site, support a model of toxin activity in which a single solvent-accessible toxin side-chain anchors the complex, with supporting weak interactions determining both the efficacy and the subtype specificity of the inhibitory activity.

9677301	A general rule for the relationship between hydrophobic effect and conformational stability of a protein: stability and structure of a series of hydrophobic mutants of human lysozyme.	To get a general rule for the relationship between hydrophobic effect and conformational stability, five Ile to Val and nine Val to Ala mutants (3SS mutants) from 3SS (C77A/C95A) human lysozyme were constructed. As known from previous studies, the 3SS protein lacking a disulfide bond between Cys77 and Cys95 is destabilized by enthalpic factors, as revealed by a decrease of about 20 kJ/mol in the denaturation Gibbs energy change (DeltaG) value, as compared to the wild-type protein, which has four disulfide bonds. In this study, the stabilities and structures of the 3SS mutants were determined by differential scanning calorimetry and X-ray crystal analysis, respectively, and compared with those of the mutants (4SS mutants) from the wild-type (4SS) protein published previously.The stabilities of all the 3SS mutants, except for V110A-3SS were decreased as compared with that of the 3SS protein, coinciding with the results for the 4SS mutants. The change in the denaturation Gibbs energy change (DeltaDeltaG) values of the 3SS mutants relative to the 3SS protein at the denaturation temperature (49.2 degreesC) of the 3SS protein at pH 2.7 were similar to those of the equivalent 4SS mutants relative to the wild-type at 64.9 degreesC.The Delta DeltaG values of the 3SS mutants correlated with the changes in hydrophobic surface area exposed upon denaturation (Delta DeltaASAHP) for all of the hydrophobic residues when the effects of the secondary structure propensity were considered. This correlation is identical with that previously found for the 4SS mutants. The linear relation between Delta DeltaG and Delta DeltaASAHP for all of the hydrophobic residues with the same slope was found also for the mutants of T4 lysozyme already reported, indicating that this is a general relationship between changes in conformational stability and changes in ASA values of hydrophobic residues due to mutations.

15095972	Crystal structures of HIV-1 reverse transcriptases mutated at codons 100, 106 and 108 and mechanisms of resistance to non-nucleoside inhibitors.	Leu100Ile, Val106Ala and Val108Ile are mutations in HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) that are observed in the clinic and give rise to resistance to certain non-nucleoside inhibitors (NNRTIs) including the first-generation drug nevirapine. In order to investigate structural mechanisms of resistance for different NNRTI classes we have determined six crystal structures of mutant RT-inhibitor complexes. Val108 does not have direct contact with nevirapine in wild-type RT and in the RT(Val108Ile) complex the biggest change observed is at the distally positioned Tyr181 which is > 8 A from the mutation site. Thus in contrast to most NNRTI resistance mutations RT(Val108Ile) appears to act via an indirect mechanism which in this case is through alterations of the ring stacking interactions of the drug particularly with Tyr181. Shifts in side-chain and inhibitor positions compared to wild-type RT are observed in complexes of nevirapine and the second-generation NNRTI UC-781 with RT(Leu100Ile) and RT(Val106Ala), leading to perturbations in inhibitor contacts with Tyr181 and Tyr188. Such perturbations are likely to be a factor contributing to the greater loss of binding for nevirapine compared to UC-781 as, in the former case, a larger proportion of binding energy is derived from aromatic ring stacking of the inhibitor with the tyrosine side-chains. The differing resistance profiles of first and second generation NNRTIs for other drug resistance mutations in RT may also be in part due to this indirect mechanism.

16459338	Stabilization of the autoproteolysis of TNF-alpha converting enzyme (TACE) results in a novel crystal form suitable for structure-based drug design studies.	The crystallization of TNF-alpha converting enzyme (TACE) has been useful in understanding the structure-activity relationships of new chemical entities. However, the propensity of TACE to undergo autoproteolysis has made enzyme handling difficult and impeded the identification of inhibitor soakable crystal forms. The autoproteolysis of TACE was found to be specific (Y352-V353) and occurred within a flexible loop that is in close proximity to the P-side of the active site. The rate of autoproteolysis was found to be proportional to the concentration of TACE, suggesting a bimolecular reaction mechanism. A limited specificity study of the S(1)' subsite was conducted using surrogate peptides and suggested substitutions that would stabilize the proteolysis of the loop at positions Y352-V353. Two mutant proteases (V353G and V353S) were generated and proved to be highly resistant to autoproteolysis. The kinetics of the more resistant mutant (V353G) and wild-type TACE were compared and demonstrated virtually identical IC(50) values for a panel of competitive inhibitors. However, the k(cat)/K(m) of the mutant for a larger substrate (P6 - P(6)') was approximately 5-fold lower than that for the wild-type enzyme. Comparison of the complexed wild-type and mutant structures indicated a subtle shift in a peripheral P-side loop (comprising the mutation site) that may be involved in substrate binding/turnover and might explain the mild kinetic difference. The characterization of this stabilized form of TACE has yielded an enzyme with similar native kinetic properties and identified a novel crystal form that is suitable for inhibitor soaking and structure determination.

2269354	Engineering of microheterogeneity-resistant p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from Pseudomonas fluorescens.	By site-directed mutagenesis, Cys-116 was converted to Ser-116 in p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase (EC 1.14.13.2) from Pseudomonas fluorescens. In contrast to wild-type enzyme, the C116S mutant is no longer susceptible to oxidation by hydrogen peroxide and shows no reactivity towards 5,5'-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoate). Crystals of the C116S mutant are isomorphous with the crystal form of wild-type enzyme. A difference electron density confirms the mutation made.

12646375	Multiple methionine substitutions are tolerated in T4 lysozyme and have coupled effects on folding and stability.	In order to further explore the tolerance of proteins to amino acid substitutions within the interior, a series of core residues was replaced by methionine within the C-terminal domain of T4 lysozyme. By replacing leucine, isoleucine, valine and phenylalanine residues a total of 10 methionines could be introduced, which corresponds to a third of the residues that are buried in this domain. As more methionines are incorporated the protein gradually loses stability. This is attributed in part to a reduction in hydrophobic stabilization, in part to the increased entropic cost of localizing the long, flexible methionine sidechains, and in part to steric clashes. The changes in structure of the mutants relative to the wildtype protein are modest but tend to increase in an additive fashion as more methionines are included. In the most extreme case, namely the 10-methionine mutant, much of the C-terminal domain remains quite similar to wildtype (root-mean-square backbone shifts of 0.56 A), while the F and G helices undergo rotations of approximately 20 degrees and center-of-mass shifts of approximately 1.4 A. For up to six methionine substitutions the changes in stability are additive. Beyond this point, however, the multiple mutants are somewhat more stable than suggested from the sum of their constituents, especially for those including the replacement Val111-->Met. This is interpreted in terms of the larger structural changes associated with this substitution. The substituted sidechains in the mutant structures have somewhat higher crystallographic thermal factors than their counterparts in WT*. Nevertheless, the interiors of the mutant proteins retain a well-defined structure with little suggestion of molten-globule characteristics. Lysozymes in which selenomethionine has been incorporated rather than methionine tend to have increased stability. At the same time they also fold faster. This provides further evidence that, at the rate-limiting step in folding, the structure of the C-terminal domain of T4 lysozyme is similar to that of the fully folded protein.

12144785	Structural bases of stability-function tradeoffs in enzymes.	The structures of enzymes reflect two tendencies that appear opposed. On one hand, they fold into compact, stable structures; on the other hand, they bind a ligand and catalyze a reaction. To be stable, enzymes fold to maximize favorable interactions, forming a tightly packed hydrophobic core, exposing hydrophilic groups, and optimizing intramolecular hydrogen-bonding. To be functional, enzymes carve out an active site for ligand binding, exposing hydrophobic surface area, clustering like charges, and providing unfulfilled hydrogen bond donors and acceptors. Using AmpC beta-lactamase, an enzyme that is well-characterized structurally and mechanistically, the relationship between enzyme stability and function was investigated by substituting key active-site residues and measuring the changes in stability and activity. Substitutions of catalytic residues Ser64, Lys67, Tyr150, Asn152, and Lys315 decrease the activity of the enzyme by 10(3)-10(5)-fold compared to wild-type. Concomitantly, many of these substitutions increase the stability of the enzyme significantly, by up to 4.7kcal/mol. To determine the structural origins of stabilization, the crystal structures of four mutant enzymes were determined to between 1.90A and 1.50A resolution. These structures revealed several mechanisms by which stability was increased, including mimicry of the substrate by the substituted residue (S64D), relief of steric strain (S64G), relief of electrostatic strain (K67Q), and improved polar complementarity (N152H). These results suggest that the preorganization of functionality characteristic of active sites has come at a considerable cost to enzyme stability. In proteins of unknown function, the presence of such destabilized regions may indicate the presence of a binding site.

8172877	Engineering alternative beta-turn types in staphylococcal nuclease.	We have refined the crystal structures of three point mutants of staphylococcal nuclease designed to favor alternative beta-turn types. Single amino acid substitutions were made in a type VIa beta-turn (residues 115-118; Tyr-Lys-Pro-Asn) containing a cis Lys 116-Pro 117 peptide bond. The mutations result in two new backbone conformations, a type I beta-turn for P117T and a type I' beta-turn for P117G and P117A. The P117G and P117A structures exhibit a dramatic difference in backbone conformation in the region of the mutation compared to the nuclease A structure such that the side chain of Lys 116 is reoriented to point into the nucleotide binding pocket. The distinct conformation observed for the nuclease A, P117G, and P117T beta-turn sequences agrees with correlations between beta-turn type and sequence identified from protein crystal structures. The P117A turn conformation provides an exception to these correlations. The results demonstrate that single residue changes can significantly alter backbone conformation, illustrating the process by which diversity in the structure of the protein surface can evolve on a conserved structural core, and suggest protein engineering applications in which the positioning as well as the identify of side chains can be modified to design new enzyme functions. Nuclease variants at the type VIa beta-turn site also allow the relationship between the amino acid sequence and beta-turn conformation to be examined in the context of an identical protein fold in crystallographic detail.

8676387	Thermodynamic and structural compensation in "size-switch" core repacking variants of bacteriophage T4 lysozyme.	Previous analysis of randomly generated multiple mutations within the core of bacteriophage T4 lysozyme suggested that the "large-to-small" substitution Leu121 to Ala (L121A) and the spatially adjacent "small-to-large" substitution Ala129 to Met (A129M) might be mutually compensating. To test this hypothesis, the individual variants L121A and A129M were generated, as well as the double "size-switch" mutant L121A/A129M. To make the interchange symmetrical, the combination of L121A with A129L to give L121A/A129L was also constructed. The single mutations were all destabilizing. Somewhat surprisingly, the small-to-large substitutions, which increase hydrophobic stabilization but can also introduce strain, were less deleterious than the large-to-small replacements. Both Ala129 --> Leu and Ala129 --> Met offset the destabilization of L121A by about 50%. Also, in contrast to typical Leu --> Ala core substitutions, which destabilize by 2 to 5 kcal/mol, Leu121 --> Ala slightly stabilized A129L and A129M. Crystal structure analysis showed that a combination of side-chain and backbone adjustments partially accommodated changes in side-chain volume, but only to a limited degree. For example, the cavity that was created by the Leu121 to Ala replacement actually became larger in L121A/A129L. The results demonstrate that the destabilization associated with a change in volume of one core residue can be specifically compensated by an offsetting volume change in an adjacent residue. It appears, however, that complete compensation is unlikely because it is difficult to reconstitute an equivalent set of interactions. The relatively slow evolution of core relative to surface residues appears, therefore, to be due to two factors. First, a mutation in a single core residue that results in a substantial change in size will normally lead to a significant loss in stability. Such mutations will presumably be selected against. Second, if a change in bulk does occur in a buried residue, it cannot normally be fully compensated by a mutation of an adjacent residue. Thus, the most probable response will tend to be reversion to the parent protein.

12364331	Oligosaccharide and sucrose complexes of amylosucrase. Structural implications for the polymerase activity.	The glucosyltransferase amylosucrase is structurally quite similar to the hydrolase alpha-amylase. How this switch in functionality is achieved is an important and fundamental question. The inactive E328Q amylosucrase variant has been co-crystallized with maltoheptaose, and the structure was determined by x-ray crystallography to 2.2 A resolution, revealing a maltoheptaose binding site in the B'-domain somewhat distant from the active site. Additional soaking of these crystals with maltoheptaose resulted in replacement of Tris in the active site with maltoheptaose, allowing the mapping of the -1 to +5 binding subsites. Crystals of amylosucrase were soaked with sucrose at different concentrations. The structures at approximately 2.1 A resolution revealed three new binding sites of different affinity. The highest affinity binding site is close to the active site but is not in the previously identified substrate access channel. Allosteric regulation seems necessary to facilitate access from this binding site. The structures show the pivotal role of the B'-domain in the transferase reaction. Based on these observations, an extension of the hydrolase reaction mechanism valid for this enzyme can be proposed. In this mechanism, the glycogen-like polymer is bound in the widest access channel to the active site. The polymer binding introduces structural changes that allow sucrose to migrate from its binding site into the active site and displace the polymer.

